
  
OVERVIEW 
  
MISSION STATEMENT 
Salem University prepares students to achieve their career goals through accessible education and relevant life skills within an inclusive and diverse environment. 
VISION OF THE UNIVERSITY 
Salem University is an inspiring, growing, and innovative private university serving our communities by providing accessible education that empowers graduates to contribute in emerging healthcare and in-demand career fields 
GOALS OF THE UNIVERSITY 
The goals of the University are to: 
•	Serve the public good through academic scholarship and community engagement; 
•	Create an environment conducive to multicultural understanding; 
•	Continue professional development of faculty and staff; 
•	Enhance student learning, teaching and institutional effectiveness; and • Maintain fiscal integrity through sound financial stewardship. 
CORE VALUES 
Salem University’s core values are: 
•	Integrity 
•	Accountability 
•	Civility 
•	Problem Solving 
CORE COMMITMENTS 
In support of its Mission, Goals, and Core Values, Salem has defined the following Core Commitments: 
•	Student Engagement and Success: Salem is committed to engaging students with learning experience that provides opportunities for personal and professional growth, and to developing life-long learners. 
•	Research and Innovation: Salem is committed to research, best practices, and 
•	Creativity in teaching and learning. 
•	Community Outreach and Engagement: Salem is committed to maintain and advance a culture of engagement and collaboration involving the exchange of knowledge and resources in a context of reciprocity with the citizens and institutions within our community, state, nation, and across the world. 
•	Resource Stewardship: Salem is committed to being an affordable private university that is recognized by diverse stakeholders for its financial sustainability, strong management, human resources, and operational efficiency and effectiveness. 
BRIEF HISTORY OF THE UNIVERSITY 
Salem College received its corporate charter from the State of West Virginia in December 1888 and offered its first term of instruction beginning in April 1889. Individuals in the Salem, West Virginia community founded Salem College to provide an affordable baccalaureate curriculum grounded in the liberal arts to prepare students for occupations, professions, and advanced studies as well as a normal curriculum to prepare educators. 
 
The institution was closely associated for many decades with the Seventh Day Baptist Church, including its Founders. While committed to helping students develop their spiritual lives as well as achieving academic goals, Salem College was never sectarian in its teaching or administration. 
 
In 2017, the institution changed its name to Salem University. This change reflects a desire by multiple constituencies, including students, alumni, and community members, to honor Salem’s West Virginia roots, history, and heritage. However, this change shall not be interpreted as indicating any diminishment of the commitment to the mission to prepare global citizens with broad knowledge, marketable professional skills, and the ability to make decisions with integrity and an international perspective. Salem continues to serve the educational needs of an increasingly diverse, global citizenry and welcomes students from around the world to join the Salem community of scholars, both on campus and through distance education. 
ACCREDITATION AND APPROVALS 
Salem University (Salem) has been accredited by The Higher Learning Commission (HLC) since March 1963. HLC can be contacted at 230 South 
LaSalle Street, Suite 7-500, Chicago, IL 60604, http://www.hlcommission.org or by telephone 800.621.7440. HLC is one of the institutional accreditation bodies recognized by the U.S. Department of Education. Salem’s main campus is located at 223 West Main Street in Salem, West Virginia, which is within HLC’s region of authority. 
Salem is authorized by the West Virginia Higher Education Policy Commission in accordance with the Code of State Rules, Title 133, Series 20, Authorization of http://www.wvhepc.edu, 304.558.0210
133, Series 20, Authorization of http://www.wvhepc.edu, 304.558.0210 Salem is authorized by the Indiana Board for Proprietary Education (BPE), 101 West Ohio Street, Suite 300, Indianapolis, IN 46204-4206. This facility is approved by BPE as a course location. The BPE can be contacted via www.in.gov/bpe/ or by telephone 317.232.1033. 
 
Salem has been approved to participate in the National Council for State Authorization Reciprocity Agreements. NC- SARA makes it easier for students to take distance courses from accredited institutions across the nation. It is administered by four regional education boards; West Virginia is part of the Southern Regional Education Board. Salem is approved to offer distance education by HLC. NC-SARA may be contacted via http://www.nc-sara.org or by telephone 303.848.3275. 
 
In November 2017, the School of Business was awarded full initial programmatic accreditation status by the Accreditation Council for Business Schools and Programs (ACBSP). This was achieved after a period of candidacy and after a thorough site visit by peer evaluators. ACBSP can be contacted via http://www.acbsp.org or by telephone 913.339.9356. 
 
In July 2020, Salem received notice from HLC that its formal proposal to extend accreditation to the Doctor of Business Administration (DBA) was approved. The DBA will be submitted to ACBSP for programmatic accreditation as soon as feasible per ACBSP guidelines. 
 
In May 2022, Salem’s School of Education was awarded programmatic accreditation by the Council for Accreditation of Educator Preparation (CAEP). CAEP can be contacted at http://www.caepnet.org or by telephone 202.223.0077. This accreditation covers initial teacher preparation programs and advanced educator preparation programs at Salem; however, this accreditation does not include individual education courses that the institution offers to P-12 educators for professional development, re-licensure, or other purposes. 

The School of Education received national program recognition for its graduate level educational leadership programs and undergraduate physical education and health teacher education programs as part of CAEP accreditation. These include Educational Leadership Constituent Council (ELCC), the National Association for Sport and Physical Education (NASPE), and American Association for Health Education (AAHE). 
ELCC is the CAEP Specialized Professional Association (SPA) for leadership preparation and is governed by the National Policy Board for Educational Administration (NPBEA), http://www.npbea.org. 
 
AAHE is CAEP SPA for health education, which is part of the Society of Health and Physical Educators (SHAPE America, http://www.shapeamerica.org), formerly known as the American Alliance for Health, Physical Education, Recreation and Dance (AAHPERD), http://www.shapeamerica.org/accreditation/healthaccreditation.cfm. 
 
NASPE is the NCATE CAEP SPA for sports and physical education, which is part of SHAPE America (formerly AAHPERD), http://www.shapeamerica.org/accreditation/peteacherprep.cfm. 
 
Salem is a member of the National League for Nursing (NLN), an organization dedicated to serving nursing faculty and leaders in nursing education at all levels, from LPN or LVN to doctoral education. NLN may be contacted via http://www.nln.org or by telephone 800.669.1656. 
 
Salem University Associate Degree in Nursing Program located at 2600 Virginia Avenue, NW Washington DC 20037. 202-909-2487. 
 
The Bachelor of Science in Nursing (RN-BSN) is accredited by the National League for Nursing Commission for Nursing Education Accreditation (NLN CNEA) located at 2600 Virginia Avenue, NW, Washington, DC 20037. 
 
Salem University Master of Science in Nursing Program is accredited by the National League for Nursing Committee for Nursing Education Accreditation (NLN CNEA) located at 2600 Virginia Avenue, NW Washington, DC 20037. 202-909-2487. 
Salem University's Integrative Health Coaching Certificate is an Approved Health and Wellness Coach Training & Education Program by the National Board for Health and Wellness Coaching (NBHWC). Graduates of this program are eligible to apply for the HWC Certifying Examination to become a National Board Certified Health & Wellness Coach (NBC-HWC). 
 
 
Salem is a member of the Council for Higher Education Accreditation, an association of over 3,000 institutions that is a national advocate and institutional voice for promoting academic quality through accreditation. See http://www.chea.org or telephone 202.955.6126. 

PROFESSIONAL LICENSURE 
All programs offered by Salem University at all levels have been designed to have curricula similar in depth and breadth to other institutions accredited by the Higher Learning Commission or other accrediting agency recognized as such by the U.S. Department of Education. Only the curricula for a few programs at Salem have been designed to lead to professional licensure. 
 
Salem’s Associate of Science in Nursing prepares graduates for career entry as a registered nurse. It is approved by the West Virginia Board of Examiners for Registered Professional Nurses. The program conforms to the requirements of the State of West Virginia 19 CSR 1, Policies, Standards and Criteria for Evaluation and Accreditation of Colleges, Departments or Schools of Nursing. The Board can be contacted via http://www.wvrnboard.wv.gov or by telephone 877.743. 6877.  
Salem’s Bachelor of Science in Education–Licensure program prepares graduates for career entry with initial teacher licensure. The graduate Educational Leadership programs of study prepare graduates for advanced administrative licensure at the principal, general supervisor, and superintendent levels. These have been approved by the West Virginia Board of Education, a division of the West Virginia Department of Education, since their inception, most recently in conjunction with CAEP NCATE accreditation process. The Department may be contacted via https://wvde.state.wv.us or by telephone 304.558.2681. 
 
Salem’s Bachelor of Science, Master, and Doctor of Business Administration offer specializations in accounting; however, these programs were not designed to meet the requirements for professional licensure as an accountant in any State. Students interested in accounting careers should contact the West Virginia Board of Accountancy via https://www.boa.wv.gov or by telephone at 304.558.3557. 
 
Each State has sovereignty with respect to the requirements for gaining and maintaining professional licensure in the given State. Professional licensure is not national in scope. Salem has not determined if its curricula leading to professional licensure meet the requirements of States other than the State of West Virginia. (See 34 CFR 668.43, July 1, 2020.) 
GOVERNANCE AND ORGANIZATION 
Effective June 1, 2005, the Board of Trustees was vested with the authority for the control and management of the University. The Board of Trustees meets quarterly and more frequently if necessary. The Board appoints the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) and is responsible for the CEO’s supervision and performance reviews. The CEO manages all aspects of the university’s operations, including recommending additional officers for consideration by the Board. All trustees and officers operate in the best interests of the university and its diverse constituencies without conflict of interest and consistent with customary fiduciary duties including, without limitation, the duties of loyalty and care. 
 
Academics is headed by the Provost, who reports to the CEO. The Provost is advised by the Deans’ Council and Academic Leadership Committee (ALC).  The Deans’ Council includes all academic deans, the executive director of academic operations, and the registrar. The ALC comprises all academic program leaders. These standing committees promote and facilitate fulfilling the mission of the university; provides input on the design, delivery, and renewal of programs of study; leads academic program and process evaluations; and reviews, discusses, and recommends changes in undergraduate and graduate programs, policies, and procedures. 

Salem Education LLC owns Salem University LLC. Salem Education LLC is a Delaware company headquartered at 3600 Market St., Suite 530, Philadelphia, PA 19104. Salem University LLC is a Delaware company that operates under the tradename Salem University at 223 West Main Street, Salem, WV 26426. It formerly was Salem International University LLC at the same location. The name was changed by resolution of the Board of Trustees in September 2017. 
 
Salem University and Salem International University are registered trade names in West Virginia, Indiana, and Florida. 
NON-DISCRIMINATION 
Salem University follows the letter and spirit of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Title IX Amendment to the Education Amendments of 1972, as well as Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, the West Virginia Human Rights Act, the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, the Equal Employment Opportunity Act of 1972, and other applicable laws and regulations. Salem University will not discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment based on race, color, creed, religion, gender, sexual orientation, age, national origin, ability, or disability. Salem admits students of any race, color, creed, religion, gender, sexual orientation, national origin, ability, or disability to all the rights, privileges, programs, and activities generally accorded or made available to students at the University. It does not discriminate based on race, color, creed, religion, gender, sexual orientation, national origin, ability, or disability in the administration of its educational policies, admission’s policy, employment practices, scholarship and loan programs, athletic and other University-administered programs. 
 
Salem University is an Equal Opportunity Employer. It prohibits discrimination and harassment of any kind. 
RETENTION AND GRADUATION RATES 
Information about retention and graduation rates as well as other information in compliance with the Student Right to Know and Campus Security Act is available in the President’s Office and online via the Disclosures page, www.salemu.edu/about/disclosures, which is incorporated by reference. The Annual Security Report (Clery Report) and the Annual Fire Safety Report are available online via the Disclosure page in one download file and in printed format as well. 
EMERGENCY PHONE NUMBER 
Dial 9-1-1 
From campus desk phones, you may need to dial 9 first, then dial 911. Call Security after you call 9-1-1. 
DISCLOSURE OF STUDENT INFORMATION 
Salem collects, processes, and maintains student information that is germane to the institution and the students based on two criteria: enabling the university to better serve its outcomes and strengthening the efforts to protect students from any damage that might result from a misuse of the information. Salem University will not redistribute or sell student information including, but not limited to, student lists, mailing labels, or electronic emails for any solicitation, commercial, recruitment, or any other purpose that is not directly related to the university. Salem complies with the provisions of the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA; 20 U.S.C. §1232g; 34 CFR Part 99) and Federal Regulations related thereto concerning disclosure and dissemination of student records.  
 
DIRECTORY INFORMATION: As defined by Salem within FERPA guidelines, directory information may be released as public information without prior consent: name, local address and phone number, permanent address and phone number, email addresses, date and place of birth, citizenship status, number of academic hours completed, level of education, academic major, full- or part-time status, academic and nonacademic honors, high school and other educational institutions attended, scholarship information and amount, and dates of attendance; as well as height and weight of members of athletics teams. 
 
Public information may be disclosed on an unlimited basis by university personnel in response to oral or written requests. Students who do not want to have their directory information published must submit a written request to the administration. The procedures and policies regarding student and parent access to educational records maintained by and at the university are available upon request from the Registrar. Students may examine their educational records by submitting a written request. 
 
GENERAL DATA PRIVACY REGULATION: (GDPR): Salem complies with provisions of the GDPR. The European Union (EU) enacted GDPR effective May 25, 2018. This regulation aims to protect consumers’ rights to their own data. GDPR has 7 principles: 1) lawful, fair, and transparent processing; 2) purpose limitation; 3) data minimization; 4) accurate and up-to-date processing; 5) limitation of storage in the form that permits identification; 6) confidential and security; and 7) accountability and liability. 
 
In conformance with this regulation, Salem has developed a committee and structure to facilitate the data privacy, data management, and data governance needs of Salem’s students from EU member states. The Data Governance Committee (DGC) is chaired by the Executive Director of IT (EDIT). (EDIT) and includes representatives from various departments within the university. The DGC defines, collects, manages, shares, and secures all data in use at Salem. The EDIT is Salem’s point person regarding any data inquiry. All staff should seek guidance from the EDIT with any data question or need. The EDIT can provide information on Salem’s data collection, data storage, data systems, data management, data security, data policies, data procedures, and other data needs across all data storage systems at Salem. The DGC and the EDIT are responsible for managing all university data policies and procedures, and when necessary, for making recommendations for changes to these policies and procedures following Salem’s policies and procedures for such revisions. 

STATE OF RESIDENCE: In conformance with Federal regulations, it is the policy of Salem University that each applicant must inform the University of their State of Residence in the USA at the time of enrollment. Furthermore, each student is required to maintain accurate, timely information regarding permanent address including State of Residence, which is maintained in the Student Information System and available to registered students via the Student Portal. 

TELEPHONE DIRECTORY 
This list of phone numbers may be used to conduct business with Salem. If the party called is busy or unavailable, you will be able to leave a message with your callback number. 

 
DEPARTMENT OR OFFICE 	TELEPHONE NUMBER 
Accounts Payable 	304.326.1450 
Admissions Office 	304.326.1109 
Alumni Relations. 	304.326.1559 
Athletics Compliance Coordinator 	304.326.1272 
Athletics Office 	304.326.1286 
Blackboard Technical Support 	317.333.7300 
Bookstore 	304.326.1207 
Bursar, Business Office 	304.326.1310 
Campus Safety & Security 	304.326.1302 or 304.326.1466 
Housing 	304.326.1473 
International Affairs 	304.326.1415 
Library 	304.326.1390 
Main Operator. Nursing 	304.326.1109 
304.326.1311 
On Campus Admissions 	304.326.1109 
Online Admissions 	844.462.9128 
Personnel 	304.326.1234 
Physical Plant 	304.326.1341 
Post Office 	304.326.1296 
President 	304.326.1234 
Provost 	304.326.1123 
Registrar 	304.326.1304 
Residence Life 	304.326.1473 
Security 	304.326.1302 or 304.326.1546 
SEVP Principal Designated School Official (PDSO) 	304.326.1482 
Student Advancement and Success 	317.804.1885 
Student Life 	304.326.1482 
Technical Support Center 	304.326.1259 
Toll Free 	844.462.9128 
Veterans Affairs School Certifying Official (VA SCO) 	304.326.1466 

BUILDINGS AND FACILITIES 
Salem’s campus comprises more than 100 acres in Salem, West Virginia. The center of the campus is a collection of buildings known as the Valley of Learning, which includes the main administrative and academic buildings, the gymnasium, the natatorium, and the chapel. 
 
Benedum Library i s located on the first floor of the Learning Resources Center. The facility is open Sunday through Friday; it is closed for university holidays. The library is open to all students both on campus and online. Its collection includes about 67,000 books, over 1,000 audiovisual aids, 5 newspapers, 2,765 electronic journals, and 300,000 microfiches. The library is a partial depository for United States Government documents. Links to online materials from the government are included in the online catalog. The physical collection may be reviewed at www.libraryworld.com, using the login name “Benedum Library”. In addition to Salem’s own collection, students may access additional library collections and request resources through interlibrary loan. The library subscribes to several online databases via the WVInfoDepot of the West Virginia Library Commission. The library subscribes to LIRN®, www.lirn.net, which provides 88 databases to support the various academic programs. On campus in West Virginia, the library contains a computer lab, photocopier, and other resources for public use. 
 
The library has automated its collection and provides computerized access through the campus- wide network as well as providing access to diverse learning resources 24/7 via the Internet for students taking blended or distance education courses across the nation and worldwide. 
 
Brewster All-Faiths Chapel serves as a place for meditation and worship for all students. The Chapel can accommodate up to 200 people for services and events. It serves as a lecture hall from time to time. 
 
Carlson Hall of Science is a three-story academic building named in honor of Chester Carlson, the developer of xerography. The first floor of Carlson Hall of Science houses the Orla A. Davis Lecture Hall, an auditorium that seats about 200 people, as well as several classrooms and faculty offices. Biology, chemistry, and physics labs are on the second and third floors. 
 
Catalano Stadium is an athletic facility located two miles west of the main campus. It is used for practice and as a facility for community activities. It was named in honor of John D. Catalano’s father, Don. John D. Catalano was inducted into the Salem Athletic Hall of Fame for his contributions. 
 
Erickson Alumni Center is located on Main Street across from the Jennings Randolph House. This facility includes a large multipurpose meeting room with kitchen on the first floor and two overnight accommodations upstairs. The center is named for the Erickson Family in honor of the late Charles O. Erickson, a well-known business and civic leader from Parkersburg, West Virginia, who provided generous funding to build an alumni center at each of the institutions of higher learning in West Virginia. 
Frank Loria Memorial Baseball Field is the home of the Salem Tigers baseball team. It is part of Clarksburg City Park. The field is named in honor of Frank Loria, a talented multi-sport athlete at Notre Dame High School in Clarksburg who went on to play for Virginia Tech, where he was a consensus All-American defensive back. He then became a coach at Marshall University. Sadly, he was among the 75 players and coaches from Marshall who perished in the tragic Southern Airlines Flight 932 crash on November 14, 1970. 

Hoffheimer Hall and Montgomery Hall are six-story student residence facilities that can accommodate about 200 students each. Both single- and double-room accommodation is available. Each hall includes laundry facilities, a study lounge, and a social lounge. These facilities are outfitted with wireless (Wi-Fi) Internet and cable television. 
 
Hope Field was the home of Salem’s softball team from1984 to 2022. It is named for the generous support provided by Hope Gas, Inc., which is now a part of Dominion Energy. Many improvements have been made over the years, with the most recent being the addition of a professional infield mix for an improved playing surface. New dugouts and locker rooms are planned. 

The Bridge Sports Complex in nearby Bridgeport has become the home of many of Salem University’s sports teams and has been an outstanding partner in the community since 2022. It is a premier sports and recreation facility offering a variety of indoor and outdoor sports, events, and programs.
 
The Jennings Randolph House is the childhood home of Senator Jennings Randolph, a distinguished graduate of Salem College (Class of 1924). He served in the U.S. House of Representatives (1933-1947) and the U.S. Senate (1958-1985). He is perhaps best remembered for sponsoring the 26TH Amendment to the Constitution, granting the right to vote for citizens at age 18. He championed this cause from 1942 until its adoption in 1971. The residence is used on special occasions. 
The Learning Resources Center is a three-story building with the first floor housing the Benedum Library. The second-floor houses nursing labs, offices, and a classroom. The third floor has 10 classrooms including 4 computer labs and 10 faculty offices. 
 
Mike Carey Court in the TED gymnasium was dedicated in his honor in 2018. It is a Connor performance floor that is the home for men’s and women’s basketball and women’s volleyball. As a student at Salem College, Carey scored more than 2,000 points for Salem before graduating in 1980. He continues to rank near the top of Salem's career scoring leaders and is a career free- throw percentage leader. He was the West Virginia Intercollegiate Athletic Conference's (WVIAC) leading scorer in 1978, a member of the 1979 WVIAC All-Tournament team, and the 1977 WVIAC Freshman of the Year. Carey began his collegiate coaching career as an assistant at Salem in 1981, taking the reins of the men's program in 1988. His teams made two NAIA and seven NCAA Division II postseason appearances and claimed five WVIAC Championships and three WVIAC Tournament Championships. The Tigers twice made the Elite Eight and earned a trip to the Final Four in 1997. Leading his team to a No. 1 national ranking in two seasons, Carey earned four WVIAC Coach of the Year awards along with a pair of NCAA Division II East Region Coach of the Year accolades. He capped his career at Salem with a 288-102 overall record.  Carey was inducted into the Salem Athletic Hall of Fame in 1992. 
 
The Online Operations Center is located at 8500 Keystone Crossing, Suite 310, Indianapolis, IN 46240, USA. This facility provides an administrative support center as well as a call center for online admissions. 
 
The Randolph Campus Center (RCC) is a three-story multi-use facility that includes the dining hall, campus post office, bookstore, Tiger’s Den coffeehouse, and conference rooms, including the Cecil H. Underwood Conference Room, the Huffman Room, and the Powell Lounge. The RCC houses the Offices of the President, Provost, Dean of Professional Programs and Program Directors, Admissions, Financial Aid, Registrar, Campus Safety and Security, and the Business Office. The main floor features the Tiger’s Den and the Cub Hub. 
The T. Edward Davis Building (TED) houses the Department of Athletics, a gymnasium, locker rooms, athletic training facilities, a six-lane competition swimming pool, and the Harry Hartman Fitness Center. The Fitness Center is equipped to promote the health, strength, and stamina of student-athletes. It includes a range of exercise equipment including free weights, trap bars, jump ropes, chains, resistance bands, and various Cybex machines. As well as being home to the Salem Water Polo and Swimming teams, the swimming pool is utilized by the local community for competitions. The athletic training facility features two hydro- therapy pools with capabilities to monitor exercise performance on a submerged treadmill, three offices, and a Cybex® TRAZER. The goal of the athletic training department is to serve student- athletes by helping prevent injuries and providing effective rehabilitation when needed. 
ADMISSIONS  

Admission to Salem is open to all qualified applicants regardless of race, color, creed, religion, gender, sexual orientation, national origin, or ability/disability. Anyone wishing to attend Salem can obtain the necessary application from the Office of Admissions or online from our website at www.salemu.edu. The completed application should be submitted to the Office of Admissions as early as possible. The university admits students on a rolling, monthly start basis. 
 
Acceptance is solely within the discretion of Salem University; some programs have additional admissions requirements explained below.  
ENROLLMENT START MONTHS BY PROGRAM
RN-BSN/MSN,, HHP & IHI
January, March, May, July, September, November
ASN Program & National 2+1 BSN – Year 2 Cohorts, DBA
January, May, September
BIO, BUS, CJ, CS, EDU, IT & Pre-Health/Pre-ASN
January through December (monthly)
Enrichment Courses and Non-Degree Seeking Program of Enrollment
January, February, May, June, September, October      
CAMPUS VISITS AND TOURS 
Prospective students and their families are encouraged to visit the campus. The Admissions Office is open from 8:00 a.m. until 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, holidays excepted. Guided tours are offered throughout the day and on Saturdays by appointment. 
DOMESTIC ADMISSIONS 
CERTIFICATION OF GRADUATION  
Undergraduate 
Domestic applicants must have earned a high school degree from an accredited secondary school in the US or have passed a high school equivalency test (HiSET). Prospective students are required to submit a signed certification of high school graduation or equivalency examination. This signature is acceptable proof of graduation per Federal law. 
Students using Federal financial also sign a certification of graduation as part of the FAFSA process. This signature is acceptable proof of graduation per Federal law. 
Graduate 
Domestic applicants must have earned a bachelor’s degree from an accredited college or university in the US. Prospective students are required to submit a signed certification of the same.  This signature is acceptable proof of graduation per Federal law. 

Students using Federal financial also sign a certification as part of the Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA) process. This signature is acceptable proof of graduation per Federal law. 

False Certification 
If a student signs a false certification, they will be ineligible for all Federal financial aid. The student is liable for repayment of all institutional charges and any stipends received for their entire period of enrollment at Salem. All future estimated payments will be canceled. In addition, the University is required to notify the U.S. Department of Education of any student who certifies false information on their FAFSA.  
ADMISSION TO EDUCATIONAL LEADERSHIP LICENSURE PROGRAMS 
MASTER OF EDUCATION IN EDUCATIONAL LEADERSHIP 
Applicants must: 
1)	Possess an undergraduate degree in education and have a valid teaching certificate or otherwise be approved for admission by the Director of Education and the Provost. 
2)	Have successfully completed three (3) years of full-time teaching or management-level experience as defined by West Virginia State Board of Education Policy 5202: 
§ 4.46. Management Level Experience. – Work experience in which an individual’s assignment in the organization is designated as a position of authority with responsibility for regulating the relationships between and among people. 
§ 4.67. Teaching Experience. – Classroom teaching or student support services* experience within the specialization(s) and grade levels reflected on the educator’s license. 
• For definitions of “student support services” please refer to West Virginia State Board of Education Policy 5202. Definitions can be found at: http://wvde.state.wv.us/policies/. 
3)	Have a cumulative undergraduate GPA of 2.75 or higher. 
 
POST-MASTER’S CERTIFICATE OF ADVANCED STUDIES IN EDUCATIONAL LEADERSHIP 
Applicants must meet the guidelines for admission to the Master of Education in Educational Leadership (above) as well as the following criteria: 
1) Have earned an education-related master’s degree and have a current, valid teaching certificate or otherwise be approved by the Dean of Education and the Provost. 2) Have a minimum 2.75 undergraduate GPA and a minimum 3.0 graduate GPA. 
ADMISSION TO THE MASTER OF EDUCATION IN CURRICULUM AND INSTRUCTION MASTER OF EDUCATION IN CURRICULUM AND INSTRUCTION 
Applicants must: 
1)	Have earned an undergraduate degree in education or a training-related field, or otherwise be approved for admission by the Director of Education and the Provost. 
2)	Have an undergraduate cumulative GPA of 2.75 or higher. 

EDUCATION PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT ADMISSIONS 
Professional development or non-degree-seeking (NDS) status applies to students who are not enrolled in a degree program but want to complete graduate course work to achieve personal or professional goals. Permission to enroll in graduate courses does not constitute admission to any graduate degree programs. Students who wish to change from NDS to regular enrollment status must complete the application process and fulfill the requirements for admission to the program in effect at the time of formal application. Coursework completed as a NDS student may apply to the chosen degree program, as appropriate, depending on an official degree audit and grades.  
NURSING ADMISSIONS 
Students applying to one of Salem’s nursing programs must have their official transcripts sent to Salem from each post-secondary academic institution they have attended previously, regardless of whether or not they want to transfer any courses. All official transcripts must be received by the end of the student’s first course, or the student may be dropped administratively from the nursing program. Applications are not considered complete until  they contain all required academic records. 
STUDENT-ATHLETE ADMISSIONS 
Student-athletes who wish to participate in intercollegiate athletics must complete the admissions process required of all students, either domestic or international. In addition, student-athletes must follow National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) regulations to be eligible to practice, compete, and receive financial assistance. Student-athletes and staff must follow and meet the guidelines set forth by the various athletic conferences of which Salem is a member. 
Student-athletes must submit proof of graduation, including but not limited to an original, official high school transcript. This must be delivered to the NCAA Eligibility Center. Original, official transcripts must be provided for all previously attended universities or colleges and must be submitted to the Salem Athletic Compliance Office prior to participation. Student-athletes must demonstrate they meet all NCAA and conference requirements at matriculation and continue to meet same annually thereafter. All eligibility questions should be directed to the Compliance Coordinator in the Athletics Department.   
INTERNATIONAL ADMISSIONS 
Salem is authorized under Federal law to enroll non-immigrant alien students. In order to take classes on campus, a student must have a valid F-1 visa. Salem is required to have official documentation that certifies that the applicant has completed a bachelor’s degree or equivalent credential and is prepared to undertake college-level work in English. 
 
International applicants who are granted a non-immigrant visa to attend Salem must commit to an enrollment of at least two academic semesters (representing eight months of continuous enrollment) in order to be admitted and to be eligible for an international student scholarship. If an international student withdraws or transfers prior to the completion of the minimum two semesters, the tuition, fees, room and board charges are non-refundable. Applicants must complete the following steps prior to enrollment: 
•	Submit Official Documentation of Prior Educational Attainment. Documents that demonstrate completion of educational credentials vary from country to country. For documents in English or Spanish, notarized copies of diplomas, certificates, 
transcripts, examination scores, and so forth, may be used to establish completion of prerequisite education and eligibility to enroll at Salem. For documents in other languages, the student must have their credentials evaluated by an agency recognized by the National Association of Credential Evaluation Services, the cost of which will be borne by the student. A current list of evaluators is available at http://www.naces.org/members.html. 
•	Submit Proof of Financial Support. Verification must be provided to Salem 
University that the student has the necessary funds to cover the costs for one academic year of full-time study before Salem can issue a Form I-20. The amount of funding may vary depending upon the duration of the stay. International students are required to submit an advance deposit of up to one semester's room and board prior to enrollment. Students may enroll in classes for a full 12 months per year, which is three semesters. If a student plans to enroll for 12 months per year, they must be prepared to pay for tuition, room and board, course materials, personal expenses, and so forth, for the third semester. 
•	Submit Evidence of English Proficiency. This requirement can be satisfied by a TOEFL (Test of English as a Foreign Language) paper-based test (PBT) score of 500 or more, a TOEFL Internet-based test (iBT) score of at least 61, an IELTS (International English Language Testing System) score of 5.5 or better, or minimum score of 95 on the Duolingo English Test. This requirement may be waived for students who have graduated from a secondary school where English is the language of instruction.   

RE-ADMISSION 
Former students who were in good standing in the last semester attended and who have not been enrolled for one semester or longer must reapply. Upon readmission these students will be subject to the requirements set forth in the current catalog at the time of readmission. 
Registration deposits must be remitted in the same manner as required for new students. 
 
A student who has been suspended from Salem will not be considered for readmission until the period of suspension has elapsed. A student who seeks to be readmitted before the period of suspension has elapsed must submit a request for readmission in writing to the Student Advisors at studentadvising@salemu.edu.  
PLACEMENT TESTING 
Salem uses open-source standardized tests for placement on an as needed basis. Students who do not meet the minimum criteria will be counseled to take supplemental instruction in parallel to their program of study to enhance learning ability and student success. International students may be recommended to take supplemental English as a Second Language (ESL) courses until they demonstrate sufficient oral and written English proficiency to be successful in their program studies. 
AUDITING 
A student who wishes to attend classes in residence at Salem without receiving credit will be classified as an auditor and must file an application for admission and the applicable tuition and fees. Applications can be obtained from the Office of Admissions. An auditor is expected to attend class regularly and participate in class activities but is not required to take examinations. Any auditor who wishes to become a student for credit must apply for that credit and satisfy university entrance requirements before the mid-point of the course in which the student is enrolled as an auditor. 
 
VETERANS AFFAIRS 
 
Salem has a VA School Certifying Official (SCO) in the Financial Aid Office who can provide forms, information, and a point of contact to assist veterans in receiving benefits. Program approvals are handled with the state approval authority administered by the West Virginia Higher Education Policy Commission. For additional information, contact the Financial Aid Office at vasco@salemu.edu. 
 
Regarding compliance with VA Post 9/11 G.I. Bill® (Ch. 33) or Vocational Rehabilitation and Employment (Ch. 31) benefits, while payment to the institution is pending from the VA, Salem will not prevent their enrollment, assess a late penalty or fee, require secure alternative or additional funding, deny their access to any resources (access to classes, libraries, or other institutional facilities) available to other students who have satisfied their tuition and fee bills to the institution. However, to qualify for this provision, such students may be required to produce the VA’s Certificate of Eligibility by the first day of class, provide written request to be certified, or provide additional information needed to properly certify the enrollment as described in other institutional policies (see our VA School Certifying Official for all requirements). 

FEDERAL WORK-STUDY PROGRAM 
Students who qualify for Federal Financial Aid are eligible for college work-study employment at the university. Students in the work-study program compete for jobs and are hired to perform work as assigned by the university. Work-study employees may be paid compensation for their maximum amount of the award. Salem conforms to US federal guidelines for work-study employees.   
 
ACADEMIC SUPPORT SERVICES  
  COURSE SCHEDULING 

The Registrar’s Office, in collaboration with program leaders, schedules courses for all students on a semester basis. Students may request to be placed in on-campus, blended, or distance education sections from time to time if the courses are available. Such requests are taken into consideration and approved if possible. However, Salem University reserves the right to schedule courses to ensure its ability to deliver programs of study for all students to progress toward graduation as swiftly as feasible. 

The vast majority of courses are four weeks in duration, starting on about a one-course-per- month schedule. Some courses/programs have courses in extended durations, which are noted clearly in the students’ schedules. Course schedules consider the students’ degree requirements and timely progression toward graduation. 
 
Students may choose to take a Standard Period of Non-Enrollment (SPNE) or other Leave of Absence (LOA) within federal guidelines and without having to withdraw. Please see Periods of Non-Enrollment below. 
 
ACADEMIC ADVISING 
Salem provides academic advising by all faculty and academic leaders. Non-administrative faculty members advise on their courses only. The academic advisors in the retention department provide continuous success monitoring and coaching in collaboration with faculty and academic leaders.  

STUDENT ADVANCEMENT AND SUCCESS 
The Office of Student Advancement and Success (SAS) is located on the third floor of the Randolph Campus Center. SAS may be reached via email to support@salemu.edu. It serves all of Salem’s campus and distance education students. SAS focuses on three aspects of student success: Student Learning, Student Engagement, and Student 
Satisfaction.  

Student Learning focuses on the support and resources provided to students. These services include placement, assistance for students with disabilities, study skills, tutoring, test-taking skills, using the learning management system, time management, prioritization, and general guidance to address various concerns raised by students. Tutoring, the Writing Center, and other services are provided to help students improve their achievement. 
 
Student Engagement focuses on student involvement in campus life, both inside and outside the classroom, to develop an integrated approach to the total student experience. Coordinated through the Manager of Student Life and Social Media,  student engagement includes various events, student organizations, co-curricular activities, community service, residence life, athletics, and career advising. Student engagement builds on the eight dimensions of wellness: social, educational, community, physical, spiritual, cultural, career services, and emotional. 
 
Student Satisfaction addresses feedback from students regarding their perceptions of attending Salem. Satisfaction surveys are conducted each fall and spring semester, which give students a means to express their opinions of multiple aspects of university life. The collected data are used to inform changes that are expected to have a positive impact on the overall student experience. 

TUTORING 
Students may request professional tutoring for classes in which they are experiencing difficulty. Tutoring services are arranged by contacting the Office of Student Advancement and Success (SAS).  Services are provided for both on-campus and distance education students through Tutor.com. 

Tutor.com is available for selected courses each month at no additional cost to students. It is available 24/7 via the Internet for students taking courses by any modality from anywhere. On campus, afternoon and evening tutoring hours are arranged as study halls. Individual tutoring for distance education students may be arranged upon request both in person and online. 
Students may request tutoring by contacting SAS. Salem provides online tutoring via the Writing Center which offers faculty-led support to improve students’ writing.   
 
FACULTY OFFICE HOURS 
Faculty members post office hours for each class they teach. During these times, appointments may be kept in person, by telephone, or by other means. The syllabus for each course lists the applicable hours and the steps for contacting faculty to arrange a conference. 
Faculty provide advising and instructional support for students during these office hours. This service applies to students taking courses on campus, blended, and distance education. While individual faculty on campus may accept drop-in office visits, an appointment is necessary to ensure the faculty is available at a mutually convenient specified time. 
 
At their discretion, faculty members may engage in tutoring. Tutoring usually involves an extended tutor-student interaction that often extends to identifying and remediating areas of prior learning needs. As such, while Salem understands tutoring supports student learning, the expectations for student progression and delivery of the current course content mitigate the time and attention that can be devoted to tutoring. 
Students may make arrangements to discuss their coursework with their faculty, their dean or program director, or the Provost. Communication with them is best initiated by Salem email and may be followed up by various means as mutually agreed. 
LIBRARY SERVICES 
Benedum Library is located on the first floor of the Benedum Learning Resources Center on campus in West Virginia. The facility is open Sunday through Friday; it is closed for university holidays. The library is open to all students both on campus and online. Its collection includes about 67,000 books, over 1,000 audiovisual aids, 2 newspapers, and 2,765 electronic journals. The library is a partial depository for United States Government documents. On campus in West Virginia, the library operates a computer lab and has a photocopier and other resources for public use. 
 
Links to online materials from the government are included in the online library catalog. Items in the physical collection may be identified through the online catalog at www.libraryworld.com, using the login name “Benedum library”. In addition to Salem’s own collection, students may access additional library collections and request resources through interlibrary loans. 

The Library has access to online databases via the WVInfoDepot of the West Virginia Library Commission. The Library subscribes to LIRN®, which provides 88 databases to support the various academic programs. The library has automated its collection and provides computerized access through the campus-wide network as well as providing access to diverse learning resources 24/7 via the Internet for students taking blended or distance education courses across the nation and worldwide, including Florida. 
 
Links to library materials are provided in all courses using Blackboard. A tutorial on using online library resources for information search is included.   
CAREER ADVISING 
Career Advising helps prepare students for a successful job search upon graduation. Students can access valuable resources through the Career Advising tab in Blackboard. Students can take advantage of local and virtual job fairs. Internships can be arranged to earn academic credit, which will help students gain valuable job skills and add to their resumes. Workshops are available wi th topics such as writing a professional statement, personal branding, dining etiquette, and dressing for success. Salem University does not offer placement services and cannot guarantee employment or salary upon graduation. Salem offers Career Advising to help students to identify employment opportunities and to attempt to realize the opportunities. 
STUDENT LIFE   STUDENT GOVERNMENT ASSOCIATION 
The Student Government Association (SGA) is the student governing body at Salem. It advocates student rights and responsibilities at the university. All full-time students are members of the Student Government Association. The SGA is directed by Executive Officers and Senators who are elected on an annual basis. There are several appointed positions as well as committees and councils that are open to participation by all students. The Senate holds monthly meetings that are open to all students. 
STUDENT ORGANIZATIONS  
Salem offers several student-run organizations that provide a variety of opportunities for students to learn, to network, and to enhance their interpersonal skills, as well as provide a means for service to the community, including the following in alphabetic order. These organizations are open to both on-campus and distance education students as indicated. 
•	Alpha Phi Omega * – National service fraternity dedicated to leadership development and community service. 
•	Biology Club – Focuses on the science community. 
•	Black Student Union – Fosters engagement and thoughtful discussions of issues affecting our diverse study body. 
•	Broadcasting Club * – Student group that works with Sports Information to stream live sporting events via the Internet. 
•	Campus Activities Board – Student-run organization that plans and facilitates cultural, social, and recreational activities. 
•	Criminal Justice Club – Focuses on careers and networking in the field of CJ. 
•	Dirigo Yearbook – Develops and publishes the university yearbook.  
•	Enactus – Partnership of business and higher education to stimulate the next generation of entrepreneurs and business leaders. 
•	Fellowship for Christian Athletes * – Focuses on serving the public good through Christ- centered fellowship. 
•	Gardening Club * – Focuses on campus and community beautification. 
•	Golden Key International Honor Society – International selective membership society that recognizes sustained distinguished academic achievement in the Top 15%, which is 3.6 or higher (sophomore), 3.7 or higher (junior), 3.8 or higher (senior and graduate student). 
•	International Student Organization – National organization helping international students transition to living and studying in the US since 1958. 
•	Literary Club – Focuses on the world of literature with an emphasis on student publishing. 
•	National Society of Leadership and Success – Selective membership based on academic standing and leadership potential. 
•	Rainbow Alliance – Provides a safe and confidential group for students in all stages of exploring their sexual identity. 
•	Student Athletic Advisory Committee * – Coordinates service projects for student- athletes to enhance community service. 
•	Student Education Association – Focuses on supporting students who are interested in the field of education with professional development and community service activities. 
•	Student Government Association – Student-centered organization led by student-elected council to represent the views and needs of students. 
•	Student Nursing Association – National association of student nurses that seeks to advance the profession. 
•	Tiger Techies – Student-led group to help students and staff with their computer and networking needs.  
All organizations are open to all eligible on-campus and distance education students. However, the organizations marked with an asterisk (“*”) provide services and hold events in Salem in person that require physical attendance in north central West Virginia. For more information, contact the Office of Student Life. 
ATHLETICS 
The university is a member of the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) Division II. It is a member of the United States Collegiate Athletic Association, the Western Water Polo Association, Mountain East (swimming/wrestling) and the Peach Belt (volleyball). Men’s and Women’s Water Polo compete against institutions in NCAA Divisions I, II, and III. The university participates in the following women’s and men’s sports:  
 
Men 	Women 
Baseball 	Softball 
Basketball 	Basketball 
Soccer 	Soccer 
Swimming 	Swimming 
Tennis 	Tennis 
Water Polo 	Water Polo 
 Wrestling	Volleyball 

Players can earn conference championships, NCAA championships, and various conference awards throughout the season. Salem offers senior and letterman awards to players who qualify. There are opportunities to be a part of the athletic experience by volunteering as team managers, statisticians, joining the broadcast club, or applying for a graduate assistant position. 
RESIDENCE LIFE 
Salem residence halls provide students with on-campus housing in West Virginia and an opportunity to learn from each other within the framework of an international community of learners. The Residence Life Hall Council serves as a voice of resident student concerns and provides opportunities for developing programs and fund-raisers for each hall. On-campus housing is available to all students without regard to race, color, creed, religion, gender, sexual orientation, ability/disability, religion, nationality, or ethnic origin. 
 
Students are required to submit a roommate application, a copy of which is available on the university website. Students are given room assignments and are issued keys the day they officially check into the residence hall. In making room assignments, the Residence Life staff will consider various factors including, but not limited to, the student's class standing, individual preferences, and the aim of providing multicultural co-curricular learning experiences. 
Housing agreements are for a specific room in a specific residence hall and are legally binding. Each time a student moves, either to a different room within the same residence hall or to a different residence hall, they must sign a new housing agreement. The University reserves the right to move the student to another room or to another residence hall if the need arises or for disciplinary reasons. Any student who changes their room without permission will be required to move back to the assigned room and will be charged a $50 administrative fee. 
 
All students are collectively responsible for damage done in the public areas of their residence hall. When the person(s) responsible for damages cannot be identified, the cost of repairs will be allocated to all students in the hall. Individual residents are responsible for damage within their own rooms. 
 
After a room assignment has been made, students may not change rooms. However, if a room assignment is determined to be unsuitable, a room change may be granted. Students must have specific permission for a room change and must do an official check-out and check-in procedure, including returning room key(s) before keys will be issued for the new room. 

All students who reside in university residence halls are required to participate in the meal plan. Students on the meal plan are required to present their student I.D. in the dining room. 

Whenever possible, specific arrangements may be made for those who require special dietary or medical attention. 
Students who remain on campus for holiday breaks may be assigned to temporary rooms for the breaks. Students enrolled for the summer semester will be re-assigned rooms (May-August). 
 
Salem is not responsible for damage to or loss of any personal property on campus and reserves the right to enter a room for emergency, maintenance, or security purposes. The university does not have a secure facility to store personal items on campus or elsewhere. 
 
Students must be actively enrolled and attending class during each term spent living on campus. The room and board plan begins on the first day of the term and ends on the last day of the semester. Students must check-out by 5:00 p.m. of the day following the end of the semester.  

CAMPUS SAFETY AND SECURITY     
 
Salem employs security personnel who provide for the security, safety, and welfare of the university community 365 days a year, 24 hours a day. In addition to patrolling campus property and buildings, including the residence halls, security can be contacted for assistance by calling 304.326.1302 or 304.203.4853 from any phone. To contact emergency services such as police, fire, or ambulance, call 911.  If 911 is called, please contact Campus Security immediately. 
 
The presence of campus security does not eliminate the need for students to take precautions to safeguard their persons and their valuables. For example, personal property should be marked securely with the owner’s information and a list of serial numbers should be kept separately. 
 
Doors should be kept always locked. Informative charts and safety tips are provided as part of residence hall programming. Of course, students are welcome to visit the Security Office located on the Third Floor of RCC for more safety information. 
According to the Students Right to Know and Campus Security Act (known as the Clery Act), 
Salem publishes an Annual Campus Security Report and a Fire Safety Report. The combined report is provided to all students; it is available from the Registrar, Financial Aid, Admissions, and Security as well as online at: http://www.salemu.edu. 
STATEMENT ON HARASSMENT RATIONALE 
State and federal laws protect employees and students from discrimination and harassment based on certain characteristics, such as race, age, gender (sex), religion, disability, and national origin. In its Guidelines on Discrimination Because of Sex, the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission states that sexual harassment is an unlawful practice. The purpose of this policy is to unequivocally set forth Salem’s position regarding sexual and other forms of illegal harassment, and the procedures to be implemented to carry out this policy. Salem prohibits any conduct on a student’s part that subjects other students or employees to illegal harassment, including sexual harassment. 
DEFINITIONS 
Illegal harassment consists of comments or behaviors that are directed at a person’s race, gender, age, disability, religion, national origin, or veteran status. Sexual harassment is defined as unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature when: 
•	Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or condition of an individual’s employment or academic success; 
•	Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as the basis for decisions affecting such individual; or 
•	Such conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with an individual’s performance or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive environment. 

POLICY 
Salem’s continuing policy is to provide an environment free from any form of illegal harassment. Sexual harassment in any manner or form is expressly prohibited. 
 
Retaliation against anyone exercising a legal right, such as filing a complaint in good faith or providing information during an investigation, is expressly prohibited, will not be tolerated, and will result in disciplinary action, regardless of the disposition of the underlying complaint. 
More information regarding Title IX can be found at https://www.salemu.edu/title-ix/
PROCEDURES 
A student who feels that they have been subjected to sexual or other illegal harassment by fellow students, employees, vendors, visitors, or guests should report the incident in writing to the Office of the President. 
 
Complaints will be investigated promptly and thoroughly by appropriate personnel. All such investigations will be designed to protect the reasonable privacy interests of all parties concerned. Disciplinary and corrective action will be taken depending upon the circumstances and as appropriate. 
 
Salem will not tolerate verbal or physical conduct by any employee or student that harasses, disrupts, or interferes with another's work performance or creates an intimidating, offensive or hostile work environment. 
 
Harassment of any kind will not be tolerated, including harassment based on race, color, creed, religion, sex, sexual orientation, national origin, ability, or disability. 
All violations of the Student Code of Conduct, which include complaints of harassment, should be brought to the attention of the Office of the President immediately. 
PARKING 
Students are responsible for knowing and obeying the on-campus parking policies. A parking permit is required to park a vehicle on-campus; however, parking is available on a first-come, first- served basis. Vehicles parked on campus without a proper decal are subject to being ticketed and towed. 
 
Resident Student Lots are always restricted to resident students. Parking is not permitted in the circle, in front of garbage dumpsters, or in other areas indicated by signs. Parked vehicles cannot block access to doors, to parking entrances, or otherwise impede traffic or access. Parking a vehicle on campus constitutes an agreement to abide by all parking rules and regulations. Parking tags remain the property of Salem and are not transferable. Salem University is not responsible for damage or lost/stolen property.

UNDERGRADUATE PROGRAMS OF STUDY  
 GOALS OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION 
Salem is committed to providing a high-quality education to all students without regard to race or color, sex, sexual orientation, veteran status, religion, age, disability, national origin, creed, ancestry, or political affiliation. Students should acquire a broad foundation in the liberal arts as well as occupational preparation to enter or advance in their chosen careers. The perspectives of the humanities, social sciences, natural sciences, and the arts should be integrated with coursework in the major to facilitate an understanding of the world at large. 
 
This foundation for lifelong learning should provide the knowledge and skills necessary to deal with social, cultural, and technological change. Students should develop critical thinking and problem-solving skills sufficient for life in contemporary society. These skills include the ability to read critically, listen critically, ask appropriate questions, gather relevant information, and apply critical analysis to reach logical conclusions. Central to these skills are mathematical literacy and proficiency in oral and written communication. Students should attain proficiency in their major fields. This proficiency should enable them to be competitive in the job market or in admission to graduate or professional schools. Students should acquire knowledge, understanding, and an appreciation of diversity in languages, cultures, ideas, and people, along with a desire to work so that all individuals are treated in a manner consistent with social justice. Students should maintain a lifelong commitment to ethical behavior, responsible citizenship, and serving the Public. 
UNDERGRADUATE CURRICULAR FRAMEWORK 
Salem offers bachelor’s and degree programs in Biology, Business Administration, Computer Science, Criminal Justice, Education, Information Technology, and Nursing. Bachelor’s degrees require completion of 120 semester credits. Associate degree programs require the successful completion of at least 60 semester credits. All credits earned in the associate’s program apply to the same bachelor’s program. 
 
The minimum cumulative GPA to graduate is 2.0. However, specific programs may require a higher GPA either overall or for courses in the major. These requirements will be shown in the program handbook or listed elsewhere in the catalog. In some cases, higher GPA requirements reflect licensure rules and regulations imposed by external agencies. 
 
The courses in bachelor’s programs generally may be categorized as follows: 
•	Foundation (45 credits) 
•	International Focus (15 credits) 
•	Recommended Electives (15 credits) 
•	Major Core (30 credits) 
•	Specializations (15 credits) 

FOUNDATION COURSES 
Undergraduate degree programs generally require successful completion of a set of liberal arts foundation courses that include English, mathematics, natural sciences, social and behavioral sciences, and the humanities. The fundamental roles of these general education courses are to: 
•	Support the Mission of the University. 
•	Emphasize the liberal arts, which are directed to general intellectual growth and development. 
•	Integrate the various disciplines. 
•	Offer philosophical, ethical, social, historical, literary, or aesthetic components. 
•	Provide the tools and concepts for analyzing culture and society in an international context. 
In addition, students are expected to gain the following competencies: 
•	Writing, listening, and speaking skills 
•	Critical thinking ability 
•	Quantitative analysis
•	Technological proficiency
•	Decision-making and problem-solving skills 
•	International and multicultural awareness 
•	Leadership and citizenship skills 
   
INTERNATIONAL FOCUS COURSES 
Consistent with and in support of the Mission, most undergraduate students will complete several general education courses that focus on global information and perspectives. The institutional goal is 15 semester credits; however, some programs do not fit this pattern, usually because of licensure requirements (i.e., ADN Program). The international focus courses help instill in students international and multicultural awareness and understanding, as well as promote global citizenship. 
RECOMMENDED ELECTIVES 
Recommended Electives are meant to expand students’ knowledge, skills, and abilities in support of their major. Program faculty have prepared a list of recommended electives for their degree programs as appropriate. Students may choose to substitute courses from other programs or electives with approval. Students may choose to take other electives with the approval of their academic leadership. 
MAJOR CORE COURSES 
All baccalaureate students must complete at least one major comprising at least 30 credits in a single discipline, which defines the major. The courses are developed by the respective faculties to ensure an educational foundation of breadth (coverage) that is comparable to other regionally accredited programs in this discipline as well as being responsive to and maintaining the unique characteristics of Salem. 

SPECIALIZATION COURSES 
Specialization courses provide students with a deeper understanding of a specific component or occupation within the major discipline. Specializations require completion of 9 or more credits of advanced courses. 
GENERAL EDUCATION   Salem University offers academically rigorous, socially, and culturally enriching foundational, international focus, and recommended elective courses in the liberal arts for all students through the General Education program. 
Foundation and International Focus courses form the critical basis of knowledge, skills, and abilities for all students with certain variations for each program. Elective courses are designed for students to further enhance their programmatic knowledge and abilities, or to explore other interesting subjects while still receiving a robust education that creates learners who can utilize and apply critical thinking throughout their programs of study. 
Each academic program has established a recommended program progression.    Exceptions must be approved through Academic Affairs. 
Each program has a combination of required credits from the Foundation and International Focus courses, student-selected electives, program core courses, and degree-specialization courses. The General Education credit requirements for Education and Nursing degree Programs are different due to their accreditation and licensing requirements. 

PROGRAM LEARNING OUTCOMES 
Graduates will demonstrate the following: 
1)	Demonstrate an understanding of written and oral communications to include information gathering and evaluation; planning and presenting effective written and oral presentations; and effective listening to understand and evaluate oral communications. 
2)	Explain and apply critical examination and evaluation of discourse; synthesize information to arrive at conclusions; and evaluate information and arguments. 
3)	Explain and represent mathematical information; develop and apply mathematics to real- world situations; evaluate mathematical models; and effectively use technology when appropriate. 
4)	Identify and describe ethical issues; evaluate alternate courses of action; develop logical conclusions and logically interpret prior analysis. 
5)	Describe the role of the United States in a global society; recognize individual and cultural differences from a global perspective; and describe the importance and influence of global diversity. 
6)	Describe the importance of political engagement within their community; identify their individual rights and responsibilities within society; describe how they can exercise those rights and responsibilities; and explain relevant connections between academic fields and civic and political participation. 
GENERAL EDUCATION CORE 

BUS201 – Personal Financial Planning 
COM101 – Critical Reasoning and Research Skills 
COM102 – Professional Communications and Technology 
ENG101 – Written English 
ENG102 – Written English 2 
FNA202 – World Music 
HIS125 – World Civilizations 
HIS210 – World Geography 
IT110 – IT Essentials 
MAT125 – College Mathematics 
MAT140 – Statistics
PSY100 – Introduction to Psychology 
SCI105 – Life Science 
SOC110 – Introduction to Sociology 
 
ELECTIVES 

BIO123 – Human Nutrition 
BUS110 – Survey of Business
BUS202 – Introduction to Business Operations
CJU101 – Survey of Criminal Justice
COM104 – Principles of Human Communication 
CS110 – Introduction to Computer Architecture
ECO255 – Survey of Economics 
ENG200 – Research and Writing for Effective Communication
FNA203 – World Art 
HIS153 – U.S. History 
HIS154 – U.S. History II
HIS205 – History of Organized Crime
HIS305 – American Foreign Policy
MAT109 – College Algebra 
PSC100 – American Government and Politics
SCI216 – Physical Science 
SOC130 – Criminology  

ASSOCIATE DEGREES
  
The goal of Salem’s associate degree programs is to provide a quality foundational education in the student’s desired field that prepares them for entry-level positions and as a platform for entry into baccalaureate programs. 

BIOLOGY
 
The Associate of Science in Biology requires the completion of 60 credits with 36 general education credits and 24 credits from the biology core, which includes:

BIO110 – General Biology 1
BIL 110 – General Biology Lab 1
BIO 111 – General Biology 2
BIL 111—General Biology Lab 2
BIO210 – Anatomy & Physiology 1
BIL 210 -- Anatomy & Physiology Lab 1
BIO211 – Anatomy & Physiology 2
BIL 211 -- Anatomy & Physiology Lab 2
CHM110 – General Chemistry 1
CHL 110 -- General Chemistry Lab 1
CHM111 – General Chemistry 2
CHL 111 -- General Chemistry Lab 2

BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION

The Associate of Science in Business Administration requires the completion of 60 credits with 45 general education credits and 15 credits from the business core, which includes:

ACC111 – Principles of Accounting 
ACC112 – Principles of Accounting 2
MGT210 – Principles of Management
MGT222 – Human Resource Management
MKT231 – Principles of Marketing  

COMPUTER SCIENCE

The Associate of Science in Computer Science requires the completion of 60 credits with 45 general education credits and 15 credits from the Computer Science core, which includes:

CS100 - Principles of Computer Science 
CS110 - Introduction to Computer Architecture 
CS120 - Fundamentals of Computation 
CS130 – Fundamentals of Computer Graphics 
CS150 - Introduction to Programming  

CRIMINAL JUSTICE

The Associate of Arts in Criminal Justice requires the completion of 60 credits with 45 general education credits and 15 credits from the Criminal Justice core, which includes:

CJU205 – Criminal Law
CJU215 – Police Operations
CJU233 – Crisis Intervention
CJU242 – Domestic Violence
CJU270 – Terrorism 

INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY

The Associate of Science in Information Technology requires the completion of 60 credits with 45 general education credits and 15 credits from the Information Technology core, which includes:

IT110 – Introduction to Information Technology 
IT130- Fundamentals of Computer Graphics 
IT150 – Computer Programming I 
IT151- Computer Programming II 
IT202 – Internet Publishing  


BACHELOR DEGREES
  
The Bachelor of Science in Biology (BSBIO) offers a rigorous curriculum that challenges students to explore those significant areas of biological science; to develop scientific approaches to tasks and problem-solving; to prepare for success in technical careers or to pursue advanced studies in professional health sciences, veterinary sciences, or other graduate programs. 
 
BIOLOGICALY SCIENCES 
 
The Bachelor of Science in Biology (BSBIO) offers a rigorous curriculum that challenges students to explore those significant areas of biological science; to develop scientific approaches to tasks and problem-solving; to prepare for success in technical careers or to pursue advanced studies in professional health sciences, veterinary sciences, or other graduate programs. 
 
The BSBIO supports the mission of the university with a scientific program of study that challenges students to develop critical thinking aligned with the scientific method. This paradigm is applied to the life sciences but is applicable to diverse occupations and settings. Students will explore the current state of knowledge with respect to global human nutrition and the pathophysiology of diseases across various populations of the world. The importance of global warming and environmental problem-solving issues are focused on the chemistry and physics components of the curriculum help. Modern scientific evidence-based approaches to information search, problem-solving, and innovation. The programs embrace qualitative and quantitative approaches that support decision-making with integrity. Biological sciences are STEM Designated Degree Programs by the US Department of Homeland Security, signaling the importance of these studies to the Nation and the World. 
The Bachelor of Science in Biology requires 42 credits in Foundation courses, 12 credits in electives, 51 credits in the program core, and 15 credits in a specialization. 
 
*Students enrolled in biology programs may be responsible for lab fees in accordance with the published bulletin. 
PROGRAM LEARNING OUTCOMES 
Graduates will demonstrate the following: 
1)	Knowledge and skills to develop scientific approaches to global science issues. 
2)	Knowledge and skills to be employed in biology- and health-related fields. 
3)	The application of scientific approaches for success in technical careers related to biology. 
4)	Knowledge and skills to perform successfully on graduate school admissions tests. 
5)	The ability to communicate scientific information in written, oral, and graphic scientific format. 
BSBIO CORE 
BIO110 – General Biology 1
BIL 110 – General Biology Lab 1
BIO111 – General Biology 2 
BIL 111—General Biology Lab 2
BIO210 – Anatomy & Physiology 
BIL 210 -- Anatomy & Physiology Lab 1
BIO211 – Anatomy & Physiology 2 
BIL 211 -- Anatomy & Physiology Lab 2
BIO499 – Senior Capstone Project (8 weeks)
CHM110 – General Chemistry 1
CHL 110 -- General Chemistry Lab 1
CHM111 – General Chemistry 2 
CHL 111 -- General Chemistry Lab 2
CHM210 – Organic Chemistry 1
CHL 210 -- Organic Chemistry Lab 1
CHM211 – Organic Chemistry 2 
CHL 211 Organic Chemistry Lab 2
CHM350 – Biochemistry 1
CHM351 – Biochemistry 2 
PHY110 – General Physics 1
PHL 110 -- General Physics Lab 1
PHY111 – General Physics 2 
PHL 111 -- General Physics Lab 2

SPECIALIZATION COURSES 
Specialization courses provide students with a deeper understanding of a specific component or occupation within the major discipline. Specializations require completion of 9 or more credits of advanced courses. 
HUMAN NUTRITION AND PERFORMANCE
BIO260 – Kinesiology & Biomechanics 
BIO441 – Active Nutritional Assessment of Athletes 
BIO445 – Pathophysiology of Gut Microbiome & Nutrition 
BIO449 – Natural Therapies and Exercise Physiology 
BIO460 – Human Nutrition and Physical Performance

PHYSIOLOGY AND EXERCISE SCIENCE

BIO260 – Kinesiology & Biomechanics 
BIO365 – Physiology of Exercise & Performance Assessment 
BIO442 – Microbiology 
BIL 442 – Microbiology Lab
BIO444 – Pathophysiology 
BIO460 – Human Nutrition and Physical Performance  

BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION  

The School of Business and the programs of study it offers to support the Mission of the University to provide a high-quality, high-value education to graduate students who are seeking initial career entry or to advance in their careers. The programs of study provide a broad education in the fundamentals of business administration with specializations to provide in- depth learning opportunities in support of specific occupational goals of students. 
MISSION OF THE SCHOOL OF BUSINESS 
The School of Business utilizes strong leadership, strategic planning, stakeholder input, data driven decision making, quality faculty and staff, and student-centered processes to provide excellent programs to both undergraduate and graduate business majors. 
BACHELOR OF SCIENCE IN BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION 
The core curriculum of the Bachelor of Science in Business Administration (BSBA) provides a foundation across the key functional areas of business administration such as management, accounting, finance, marketing, law, and organizational behavior. Specializations are offered that allow students to gain additional knowledge, skills, and abilities that are focused on occupations, such as accounting, health care management, international business, and sports and recreation management. The capstone course enables students to demonstrate their ability to make decisions with integrity, informed by economic, legal, ethical, and global perspectives. 
The Bachelor of Science in Business Administration requires 60 credits in Foundation courses, 15 credits in electives, 30 credits in the program core, and 15 credits in a specialization. 

PROGRAM LEARNING OUTCOMES 
Graduates will demonstrate the following: 
1)	Knowledge, skills, and abilities in business management, financial management, international business, marketing, statistics, and human resource management. 
2)	Knowledge, skills, and abilities to compete in the global market economy. 
3)	Knowledge, skills, and abilities for employment or for admission to advanced programs in the field of business. 
4)	Ability to communicate information in written, oral, and graphic formats. 
BSBA CORE 

ACC111 – Principles of Accounting 
ACC112 – Principles of Accounting 2 
BUS323 – Commercial Law 
FIN344 – Corporate Finance 
FIN345 – Corporate Finance 2 
MGT210 – Principles of Management 
MGT361 – Management Information Systems 
MGT363 – Organizational Theory 
MGT499 – Senior Capstone Project 
MKT231 – Principles of Marketing
  
SPECIALIZATION COURSES 
Specialization courses provide students with a deeper understanding of a specific component or occupation within the major discipline. Specializations require completion of 9 or more credits of advanced courses. 
ACCOUNTING 
ACC304 – Financial Accounting  
ACC305 – Financial Accounting 2 
ACC316 – Cost Accounting 
ACC411 – Auditing 
ACC412 – Corporate Taxation 

HEALTH CARE MANAGEMENT 
MGT212 – Introduction to Health Care Management 
MGT222 – Human Resources Management 
MGT225 – Legal Aspects of Health Care Management 
MGT310 – Economics and Health Care Finance 
MGT426 – International Issues in Health Care Management

HUMAN RESOURCES MANAGEMENT 
MGT222 – Human Resources Management 
MGT410 – Compensation and Benefits Management 
MGT411 – Employment Law 
MGT412 – International Human Resources Management 
MGT450 – Special Topics

INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS 
BUS440 – International Law & Public Policy 
FIN343 – International Finance & Banking 
MGT222 – Human Resources Management 
MGT424 – International Business Management 
MKT431 – International Marketing

SPORTS AND RECREATION MANAGEMENT 
PED418 – Organization & Administration of Physical Education & Sports 
SMG210 – Principles of Sports Management 
SMG230 – Governance & Ethics in Sports 
SMG340 – Facilities & Event Management 
SMG380 – Legal Aspects of Sports 

COMPUTER SCIENCE  

The Bachelor of Science in Computer Science (BSCS) program at Salem focuses on preparing students to be able to plan, design, develop, and manage software systems for commercial and government applications. The core courses cover the principles of computer science, computer architectures, database management systems, operating systems, networking, and project management. Specializations are offered in Software Development and Data Analytics, two burgeoning occupations as indicated by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 
To support the university’s mission, the Computer Science Program endeavors to prepare Computer Science professionals to be effective in a diverse and dynamic Computer Science field. The Computer Science program at Salem University prepares our graduates by providing theoretical, experiential, and applied knowledge to provide solutions for a rapidly growing industry. Salem University and the Computer Science Program seek to employ faculty with a wide variety of experiences and education to provide expert instruction on the many concepts and principles involved in Computer Science and Information Technology studies. 
Program faculty members strive to provide students with a rewarding classroom experience rich in instruction, skills-building, and real-world application. Among other features of the program, this mission-oriented approach ensures that Salem University provides a challenging and robust information Technology program that continues to meet the needs of the student and the industry with a global perspective. With faculty approval, students may elect to repeat courses for additional credit to gain greater depth of understanding. Finally, the field of Computer 
 
Science offers STEM Designated Degree Programs as defined by the US Department of Homeland Security, signaling their importance to the Nation and the World. 
The Bachelor of Science in Computer Science requires 60 credits in Foundation courses, 15 credits in electives, 30 credits in the program core, and 15 credits in a specialization. 
PROGRAM LEARNING OUTCOMES 
Graduates will demonstrate the following: 
1)	Ability to apply computer science theory and principles in addressing global business opportunities and challenges. 
2)	Knowledge, skills, and abilities in computer science with an applied, real-world focus. 
3)	Knowledge, skills, and abilities in business management as applied to computer science development and operations. 
4)	Ability to communicate information in written, oral, and graphic formats. 
5)	Knowledge, skills, and abilities to enter advanced studies in computer science or business. 
   
BSCS CORE 
CS100 – Principles of Computer Science 
CS110 – Introduction to Computer Architecture 
CS120 – Fundamentals of Computation 
CS130 – Fundamentals of Computer Graphics 
CS150 – Introduction to Programming 
CS310 – Database Architectures 
CS350 – Operating Systems 
CS409 – Basic Networking 
CS445 – Project Management 
CS499 – Senior Capstone

SPECIALIZATION COURSES 
Specialization courses provide students with a deeper understanding of a specific component or occupation within the major discipline. Specializations require completion of 9 or more credits of advanced courses. 
SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT 
CS323 – Methods of Software Development 
CS325 – Intermediate Programming 
CS330 – Data Structures & Algorithms 
CS420 – Information Systems Security 
CS435 – Compilers & Languages  

CRIMINAL JUSTICE  
The Bachelor of Arts in Criminal Justice (BACJ) prepares students to enter or advance in careers such as protective services, law enforcement, corrections, crime prevention and support services, court administration and general security. The program supports Salem University’s mission by incorporating a world view into the program, exploring diverse perspectives on politics, cultures, justice systems, and crime challenges. In addition, the program is designed to provide students with skills that are useful in the detection, investigation, and prosecution of crimes through courses in policing, criminal investigations, crime scene management, and criminal procedure. The program further supports the university’s mission through courses in criminal justice management, emergency management, correctional administration, and ethics where students learn the skills of critical thinking and ethical decision making. The program encourages students to explore the philosophy and history of the criminal justice system to develop an understanding of its strengths, weaknesses, and continual evolution. The Core courses cover fundamental concepts that are essential to a broad understanding of the field including criminal and constitutional law, crisis intervention, domestic violence, terrorism, evidence and procedure, and investigation and forensics. Specializations include administration of justice, corrections, law enforcement, crime scene investigation, and homeland security. 
 
The Bachelor of Arts in Criminal Justice requires 60 credits in Foundation courses, 15 credits in electives, 30 credits in the program core, and 15 credits in a specialization. 
PROGRAM LEARNING OUTCOMES 
Graduates will demonstrate the following: 
1)	Knowledge and skills in constitutional and criminal law to include the history and development of our criminal justice system, processes, and the foundations of citizens’ rights. 
2)	Knowledge and skills in criminal investigations to include initial response, the tools and procedures of modern investigations, and the trial process. 
3)	Knowledge and understanding of current challenges and areas of focus in criminal justice to include crisis intervention, domestic violence, and terrorism. 
4)	Knowledge and skills in using and interpreting criminal justice research and statistics along with an understanding of the ethical principles involved in the criminal justice field. 
5)	Knowledge, skills, and abilities for employment in the field of criminal justice or for admission to graduate programs. 

BACJ CORE 
CJU205 – Criminal Law 
CJU210 – Criminal Evidence and Constitutional Procedure 
CJU230 – Criminal Investigation and Forensics 
CJU233 – Crisis Intervention 
CJU242 – Domestic Violence 
CJU270 – Terrorism 
CJU405 – Constitutional Law 
CJU408 – Criminal Justice Research and Statistics 
CJU440 – Ethics in Criminal Justice 
CJU499 – Capstone

SPECIALIZATION COURSES 
Specialization courses provide students with a deeper understanding of a specific component or occupation within the major discipline. Specializations require completion of 9 or more credits of advanced courses. 
ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE 
CJU215 – Police Operations 
CJU220 – Corrections System and Operations 
CJU221 – Juvenile Justice 
CJU325 – White Collar Crime 
CJU449 – Criminal Justice Management

CRIME SCENE INVESTIGATION 
CJU441 – Crime Scene Photography 
CJU442 – Fingerprints and Impression Evidence 
CJU443 – Crime Scene Management 
CJU444 – Ballistics and Firearm Identification 
CJU446 – Digital Evidence 

HOMELAND SECURITY 
CJU447 – Homeland Security 
CJU448 – Emergency Management 
CJU449 – Criminal Justice Management 
CJU450 – Special Topics 
CJU451 – Incident Command and Management

LAW ENFORCEMENT 
CJU215 – Police Operations 
CJU235 – Security 
CJU300 – Police Administration 
CJU315 – Patrol and Community Policing 
CJU449 – Criminal Justice Management 

EDUCATION  

The Salem School of Education is nationally accredited and offers a Bachelor of Science in Education (BSED) degree program with teaching specializations in English Education (5th grade to adult), and Physical Education (Pre-Kindergarten to Adult). These programs lead to licensure and have been approved by the West Virginia State Board of Education. 
 
The Salem School of Education also offers these same programs in a Bachelor of Science in Education (BSED) non-licensure degree program for those students who do not intend to teach in the State of West Virginia at this time. The BSED non-licensure program provides all the courses for teaching but does not include the state required field experience and residency courses. 
Students will take alternative courses. Students who follow this path can apply for licensure in other states as well as West Virginia under each state’s alternative licensure program in the event they choose to teach. 
BSED TEACHER EDUCATION PROGRAM – LICENSURE 
Through standards-based educator preparation programs, the Salem BSED program strives to create educational leaders who facilitate learning in the classroom (teacher), building (principal), and district (supervisor of instruction and/or superintendent). This includes the candidate acquisition of the beliefs, knowledge, and skills necessary to effectively promote learning in the 21ST Century as a Facilitator of Learning. This acquisition is promoted through preparation programs built to emphasize the inter-connectedness of beliefs, knowledge, and skills as identified by: 

1)	Interpersonal and Collaborative Skills. 
A facilitator of learning clearly and consistently communicates in a variety of ways with diverse stakeholders and across multiple school-related settings, effectively utilizing 21ST Century tools and resources. 
2)	Content Knowledge 
A facilitator of learning masters the content knowledge necessary to support 21ST Century teaching and learning and can demonstrate the interrelatedness of this content and its integration across multiple educational roles and settings. 
3)	Teaching, Learning, and Leading 
A facilitator of learning demonstrates leadership by implementing classroom and school processes that promote 21ST Century learning through planning, implementation, evaluation, reflection, and revision. 
Preparation for the 21ST Century Workplace 
A facilitator of learning understands the skills required in diverse, globally connected, effective 21ST Century work environments, and the importance of a self- directed path of continuous professional growth. 
4)	Professional Ethical Standards 
A facilitator of learning models the ethical standards expected of a 21ST Century professional educator across multiple learning environments and roles, and within all stakeholder communities. 

TEACHER EDUCATION PROGRAM ADMISSION, MATRICULATION, AND GRADUATION 
Students who are majoring in education and intending to enter the Salem teacher education program must undergo a portfolio evaluation and interview. Successful completion of this Level I Review (the first of a three-level review process across the program) is required for formal admission into the teacher education program. Upon formal admission, education majors become teacher candidates. Teacher candidates must maintain a minimum grade-point average of 3.0 on a 4-point scale and participate in fieldwork and clinical experiences (student teaching). 

Fieldwork and student teaching provide teacher candidates opportunities to work in local public schools to apply what they learn in classes and practice becoming teachers. Teacher candidate’s knowledge, skills, and dispositions (professional attitudes) are evaluated throughout the preparation program through a variety of course based and external assessments administered by university faculty and public school site supervisors using such activities as performance evaluation, state required licensure tests (The Praxis Series), and the Teacher Education Portfolio Review Process. The goal of the ongoing portfolio process is assessment of teacher candidate development as a Facilitator of Learning. 
THE SALEM TEACHER EDUCATION PROGRAM PORTFOLIO PROCESS 
The Salem Teacher Education Program requires that all teacher candidates maintain an electronic portfolio. This portfolio should be constantly updated over the course of the preparation program. It should be comprised of artifacts (actual examples of work) that best demonstrate the teacher candidate has an in-depth knowledge and understanding of their content area, the West Virginia Professional Teaching Standards, and the Salem Facilitator of Learning framework. 

WEST VIRGINIA PROFESSIONAL TEACHING STANDARDS 
Standard 1: Curriculum and Planning 
Standard 2: The Learner and the Learning Environment 
Standard 3: Teaching 
Standard 4: Professional Responsibilities for Self-Renewal 
Standard 5: Professional Responsibilities for School and Community 
 
The purpose of the portfolio is not only to demonstrate mastery of what a teacher candidate knows and is able to do, but also to demonstrate how they have grown in knowledge and understanding over the course of the Teacher Education Program. This evidence of growth is a major component used for assessment during the Level II and Level III reviews. 
LEVEL I PORTFOLIO REVIEW – ADMISSION 
The portfolio will first be assessed at Level I, as the application process for formal admission to the School of Education and to the student’s selected teacher preparation program. This process includes a candidate interview. Potential Teacher Candidates are eligible to submit their portfolios for review after they have met the following requirements: 
•	Completion of 24-36 hours of coursework, including EDU101, SPE120, or EDU272; 
•	A minimum GPA of 3.0 in content courses, the professional educator core courses, and overall; 
•	Praxis Core Academic Skills for Educators (CORE): this series of tests must be passed prior to full admission to a teacher education program. For education majors deficient in meeting Praxis Core requirements, provisional admission status may be granted for a specific timeframe due to extenuating circumstances and education faculty committee review to support remediation efforts. 
•	Negative screening for Tuberculosis (Tine Test); and 
•	Clear background check. 
The Level I Review, and Interview must demonstrate the potential teacher education candidate has the ability to perform at the “Acceptable” level of knowledge, understanding, and performance necessary to progress through the Salem Teacher Education Program. “Acceptable” performance levels are defined within portfolio scoring rubrics that can be found in the Salem Teacher Education Portfolio Handbook available in hard copy and on the Salem web site. 
LEVEL II PORTFOLIO REVIEW– ADMISSION TO INTERNSHIP 
A successful review of the Level II portfolio is required to advance to the Teacher Candidate Internship (EDU490, EDU491, and EDU492). It is the responsibility of each teacher candidate to schedule these reviews. Teacher Candidates are eligible to schedule a Level II review after they have met the following requirements: 
•	Successful completion of all required courses for the program of study and attendance at all Education Professional Seminars. 
•	A minimum GPA of 3.0 in content courses, professional educator core courses, and overall; 
•	Meeting the required minimum score identified by the West Virginia Department of Education on all program-required Praxis tests, which includes the CORE and licensure specific specialization tests. 
At the Level II review, Candidates must demonstrate they are primarily at the “Target” level of knowledge, understanding, and performance required for a productive and effective Teacher Education Internship experience. “Target” performance levels are defined by the portfolio scoring rubrics. The Level II review must exhibit clear evidence to demonstrate the teacher candidate has grown in their knowledge and potential to function as an effective teacher candidate intern. 
LEVEL III PORTFOLIO REVIEW– PROGRAM COMPLETION, GRADUATION AND RECOMMENDATION FOR LICENSURE 
At the Level III review, the portfolio should evolve into a final showcase portfolio. This final version of the portfolio should provide the best evidence possible of what a Teacher Candidate knows and is able to do as a potential beginning teacher. Teacher Candidates must successfully complete this final review of the portfolio as the culminating experience of the Salem Teacher Education Program. Candidates are eligible to schedule a Level III Review after they have met the following requirements: 
•	A minimum GPA of 3.0 in content courses, in professional educator core courses, and overall. 
•	Successful completion of EDU416 Educational Assessment and Strategies. 
•	Successful completion of the Internship (EDU490, 491, and 492). 
•	Meeting the required minimum score identified by the West Virginia Department of Education on the Praxis Professional Learning and Teaching (PLT) test. 

The Level III review requires the Teacher Candidate to successfully present and defend their portfolio. 

TEACHER EDUCATION RESIDENCY 
The Teacher education program culminates with a year-long residency (formally named internship) that embeds professional education content and methodology courses (300 or higher) so that teaching practices are enriched by applicable exercises in the classroom during the residency experience. During this residency, teacher candidate residents (formerly interns) will follow the same workday/time schedule as their cooperating teacher(s). Teacher candidates should understand they are required to be on campus while school is in session. The residency assignment typically will consist of two 16-week placements in public school settings in the appropriate programmatic level and content area. In addition to classroom assignments, residents participate in extracurricular activities of the school and the community. 
TRANSFER STUDENTS 
Transfer students, whether within the university or transferring from another institution of higher education, who wish to pursue the teacher education program must register their intent with the Registrar and with the School of Education. The initial evaluation for acceptance into the major will depend on the GPA and Praxis scores at the time of transfer. 
TEACHER CERTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS 
Teacher candidates, upon completion of the teacher preparation program of study will be fully prepared for licensure by the State of West Virginia. Those desiring to secure teaching certificates in States other than West Virginia should familiarize themselves with the requirements for certification in the State in which they plan to seek employment. 

HIGH MORAL CHARACTER 
PLEASE BE AWARE: West Virginia State Law regarding licensure requires Salem University to attest in writing that the applicant for licensure is of “high moral character” (Form 19- Professional Administrative Certification). DO NOT jeopardize the institution’s ability to sign this certification on your behalf by demonstrating poor judgment during your program of study. 
BSED IN ENGLISH EDUCATION – LICENSURE 
The BSED in English Education specialization focuses on 21ST Century skills and emphasize the mastery of knowledge, skills, and dispositions identified in the National Council of Teachers of English (NCTE) Standards listed below and the Facilitator of Learning model as assessed in Portfolio Levels I, II, and III. English licensure by the State of West Virginia is for 5-Adult. 
LEARNING OUTCOMES 
Graduates will demonstrate the knowledge, skills, and dispositions needed to provide effective instruction related to the study of: 
1)	Content Knowledge: Candidates demonstrate knowledge of English Language Arts (ELA) subject matter content that specifically includes literature and multimedia texts as well as knowledge of the nature of adolescents as readers. 
2)	Content Knowledge: Candidates demonstrate knowledge of English language arts subject matter content that specifically includes language and writing as well as knowledge of adolescents as language users. 
3)	Content Pedagogy, Planning Literature and Reading Instruction in ELA: Candidates plan instruction and design assessments for reading and the study of literature to promote learning for all students. 
4)	Content Pedagogy, Planning Composition Instruction in ELA: Candidates plan instruction and design assessments for composing texts (i.e., oral, written, and visual) to promote learning for all students. 
5)	Learners and Learning, Implementing English Language Arts Instruction: Candidates plan, implement, assess, and reflect on Research based instruction that increases motivation and active student engagement, builds sustained learning of English language arts, and responds to diverse students’ context based needs. 
6)	Professional Knowledge and Skills: Candidates demonstrate knowledge of how theories and research about social justice, diversity, equity, student identities, and schools as institutions can enhance students’ opportunities to learn in English Language Arts. 
7)	Professional Knowledge and Skills: Candidates are prepared to interact knowledgeably with students, families, and colleagues based on social needs and institutional roles, engage in leadership and/or collaborative roles in English Language Arts professional learning communities, and actively develop as professional educators. 
PROFESSIONAL EDUCATOR CORE 

EDU101 – Foundations of Education 
EDU222 – Technology Integration in the Classroom 
EDU271 – Human Development 
EDU272 – Educational Psychology 
EDU362 – Reading Across the Content Areas 
EDU370 – Schools, Families, and Communities 
EDU376 – Materials & Methods of Teaching 
EDU416 – Educational Assessment Strategies 
EDU436 – Classroom Environment & Management 
EDU490 – Residency Planning & Assessment 
EDU491 – Residency I 
EDU492 – Residency II 
SPE120 – Areas of Exceptionality in Special Education 
SPE390 – Inclusive Curriculum, Materials & Methods 

BSED IN ENGLISH EDUCATION – LICENSURE 
In addition to the courses shown above, students in the BSED in English Education must successfully complete the following courses: 

ENG206 – Structural Grammar: The English Language 
ENG220 – American Literature 
ENG222 – American Literature 2 
ENG230 – British Literature 
ENG232 – British Literature 2 
ENG300 – Cultural Impact on Language and Learning 
ENG304 – Non-Western World Literature 
ENG306 – Drama and Poetry ENG308 Short Story and Novel 
ENG377A – Materials and Methods of Teaching English 
ENG377B – Materials and Methods of Teaching English 2

BSED IN PHYSICAL EDUCATION – LICENSURE 
Learning Outcomes for the specialization in Physical Education focus on 21ST Century skills and emphasize the mastery of knowledge, skills, and dispositions identified in the American Alliance for Heath, Physical Education, Recreation and Dance (AAHPERD/NASPE) Standards listed below and the Facilitator of Learning model as assessed in Portfolio Levels I, II, and III. 
LEARNING OUTCOMES 
Graduates will demonstrate the knowledge, skills, and dispositions needed to provide effective instruction related to: 
1)	Understanding and applying discipline specific scientific and theoretical concepts critical to the development of physically education individuals. 
2)	Being physically educated individuals with the knowledge and skills necessary to demonstrate competent movement performance and health enhancing fitness as delineated in the NAPSE K-12 Standards. 
3)	Planning and implementing developmentally appropriate learning experiences aligned with local, state, and national standards to address the diverse needs of all students. 
4)	Using effective communication and pedagogical skills and strategies to enhance student engagement and learning. 
5)	Utilizing assessments and reflection to foster student learning and inform instructional decisions. 
6)	Demonstrating dispositions is essential to becoming effective professionals. 
PROFESSIONAL EDUCATOR CORE 

EDU101 – Foundations of Education 
EDU222 – Technology Integration in the Classroom 
EDU271 – Human Development 
EDU272 – Educational Psychology 
EDU362 – Reading Across the Content Areas 
EDU370 – Schools, Families, and Communities 
EDU376 – Materials & Methods of Teaching 
EDU416 – Educational Assessment Strategies 
EDU436 – Classroom Environment & Management 
EDU490 – Residency Planning & Assessment 
EDU491 – Residency I 
EDU492 – Residency II 
SPE120 – Areas of Exceptionality in Special Education 
SPE390 – Inclusive Curriculum, Materials & Methods 

In addition to the courses shown above, students in the BSED in Physical Education must successfully complete the following courses: 
BIO210 – Anatomy and Physiology 
BIO211 – Anatomy and Physiology 2 
BIO460 – Advanced Topics in Human Nutrition 
PED101 – Individual Sports 
PED102 – Team Sports 
PED116 – Foundations of Physical Education & Sport 
PED209 – Adapted Physical Education & Fitness 
PED250 – Kinesiology and Biomechanics 
PED377A – Materials and Methods of Teaching Physical Education 
PED377B – Materials and Methods of Teaching Physical Education 2 
PED395 – Physiology of Exercise and Performance Assessment 
PED422 – Advanced Topics in Physical Education

BSED IN EDUCATION – NON-LICENSURE 
Through standards-based educator preparation programs, the Salem BSED program non- licensure program strives to create educational leaders who understand the expectations of teachers and have successfully completed the necessary course work to work in PK12 education and/or may be pursuing a license outside the state of West Virginia. Because most states rely on CAEP standards, this includes candidate acquisition of the beliefs, knowledge, and skills necessary to effectively promote learning in the 21ST Century as a Facilitator of Learning. This acquisition is promoted through preparation programs built to emphasize the interconnectedness of beliefs, knowledge, and skills as identified by: 

1) Interpersonal and Collaborative Skills. 
A facilitator of learning clearly and consistently communicates in a variety of ways with diverse stakeholders and across multiple school-related settings, effectively utilizing 21ST Century tools and resources. 
2) Content Knowledge 
A facilitator of learning masters the content knowledge necessary to support 21ST Century teaching and learning and can demonstrate the interrelatedness of this content and its integration across multiple educational roles and settings. 
3) Teaching, Learning, and Leading 
A facilitator of learning demonstrates leadership by implementing classroom and school processes that promote 21ST Century learning through planning, implementation, evaluation, reflection, and revision. 
 
4) Preparation for the 21ST Century Workplace 
A facilitator of learning understands the skills required in diverse, globally connected, effective 21ST Century work environments, and the importance of a self-directed path of continuous professional growth. 
5) Professional Ethical Standards 
A facilitator of learning models the ethical standards expected of a 21st Century professional educator across multiple learning environments and roles, and within all stakeholder communities. 
TRANSFER STUDENTS 
Transfer students, whether within the university or transferring from another institution of higher education, who wish to pursue the non-licensure education program must register their intent with the Registrar and with the School of Education. The initial evaluation for acceptance into the major will depend on the GPA at the time of transfer. 
BACHELOR OF SCIENCE IN EDUCATION – NON-LICENSURE 
The Bachelor of Science in Education (BSED) non-licensure program is an educator preparation program that does not lead to teacher licensure. All students matriculating in the program are required to meet the minimum General Education requirements. In addition, students may be required to take additional courses based on their Individual Learning Plan developed after admission to the program. 
GENERAL EDUCATION COURSES 
COM101 – Critical Reasoning and Research Skills 
COM102 – Professional Communications and Technology C 
COM104 – Principles of Human Communication 
ECO255 – Survey of Economics 
ENG101 – Written English 
ENG102 – Written English 2 
HED120 – Core Concepts of Personal Health 
HIS153 – U.S. History 
HIS154 – U.S. History 2 
MAT125 – College Mathematics 
SOC110 – Introduction to Sociology 
FNA202 – World Music 
BIO101 – Basic Principles of Biology 
ENG200 – Research and Writing for Effective Communication

BSED IN ENGLISH EDUCATION – NON-LICENSURE 
The BSED in English Education specialization focuses on 21st Century skills and emphasizes the mastery of knowledge, skills, and dispositions listed below and the Facilitator of Learning model as assessed in Portfolio Levels I, II, and III. 

LEARNING OUTCOMES 
Graduates will demonstrate the knowledge, skills and dispositions needed related to the study of: 
1)	Content Knowledge: Candidates demonstrate knowledge of English language arts subject matter content that specifically includes literature and multimedia texts as well as knowledge of the nature of adolescents as readers. 
2)	Content Knowledge: Candidates demonstrate knowledge of English language arts subject matter content that specifically includes language and writing as well as knowledge of adolescents as language users. 
3)	Content Pedagogy, Planning Literature and Reading Instruction in ELA: Candidates plan instruction and design assessments for reading and the study of literature to promote learning for all students. 
4)	Content Pedagogy, Planning Composition Instruction in ELA: Candidates plan instruction and design assessments for composing texts (i.e., oral, written, and visual) to promote learning for all students. 
5)	Learners and Learning, Implementing English Language Arts Instruction: Candidates plan, implement, assess, and reflect on Research based instruction that increases motivation and active student engagement, builds sustained learning of English language arts, and responds to diverse students’ context based needs. 
6)	Professional Knowledge and Skills: Candidates demonstrate knowledge of how theories and research about social justice, diversity, equity, student identities, and schools as institutions can enhance students’ opportunities to learn in English Language Arts. 
7)	Professional Knowledge and Skills: Candidates are prepared to interact knowledgeably with students, families, and colleagues based on social needs and institutional roles, engage in leadership and/or collaborative roles in English Language Arts professional learning communities, and actively develop as professional educators.
BSED NON-LICENSURE ENGLISH EDUCATION COURSES 
EDU101 – Foundations of Education 
EDU222 – Technology Integration in the Classroom 
EDU271 – Human Development 
EDU272 – Educational Psychology 
EDU362 – Reading Across the Content Areas 
EDU370 – Schools, Families, and Communities 
EDU376 – Materials & Methods of Teaching 
EDU416 – Educational Assessment Strategies 
EDU436 – Classroom Environment & Management 
SPE120 – Areas of Exceptionality in Special Education 
SPE390 – Inclusive Curriculum, Materials & Methods 
ENG206 – Structural Grammar: The English Language 
ENG220 – American Literature 
ENG222 – American Literature 2 
ENG230 – British Literature 
ENG232 – British Literature 2 
ENG300 – Cultural Impact on Language and Learning 
ENG304 – Non-Western World Literature 
ENG306 – Drama and Poetry 
ENG308 – Short Story and Novel 
ENG377A – Materials and Methods of Teaching English 
ENG377B – Materials and Methods of Teaching English 2 
EDU497 – Global Education Systems 
EDU498 – Research Paper in Education 
EDU499 – Trauma in Education

BSED IN PHYSICAL EDUCATION – NON-LICENSURE 
Learning Outcomes for the specialization in Physical Education focus on 21st Century skills and emphasize the mastery of knowledge, skills, and dispositions identified in the American Alliance for Heath, Physical Education, Recreation and Dance (AAHPERD/NASPE). 
LEARNING OUTCOMES 
Graduates will demonstrate the knowledge, skills, and dispositions needed to provide effective instruction related to: 
1)	Understanding and applying discipline specific scientific and theoretical concepts critical to the development of physically education individuals. 
2)	Being physically educated individuals with the knowledge and skills necessary to demonstrate competent movement performance and health enhancing fitness as delineated in the NAPSE K12 Standards. 
3)	Planning and implementing developmentally appropriate learning experiences aligned with local, state, and national standards to address the diverse needs of all students. 
4)	Using effective communication and pedagogical skills and strategies to enhance student engagement and learning. 
5)	Utilizing assessments and reflection to foster student learning and inform instructional decisions. 
6)	Demonstrating dispositions is essential to becoming effective professionals. 

BSED NON-LICENSURE PHYSICAL EDUCATION COURSES 
EDU101 – Foundations of Education 
EDU222 – Technology Integration in the Classroom 
EDU271 – Human Development 
EDU272 – Educational Psychology 
EDU362 – Reading Across the Content Areas 
EDU370 – Schools, Families, and Communities 
EDU376 – Materials & Methods of Teaching 
EDU416 – Educational Assessment Strategies 
EDU436 – Classroom Environment & Management 
SPE120 – Areas of Exceptionality in Special Education 
SPE390 – Inclusive Curriculum, Materials & Methods 
BIO210 – Anatomy and Physiology 
BIO211 – Anatomy and Physiology 2 
BIO460 – Advanced Topics in Human Nutrition 
HED130 – Consumer Health 
HED270 – Categorical School Health Topics 
HED301 – Admin of School Health Programs 
PED101 – Individual Sports 
PED102 – Team Sports 
PED116 – Foundations of Physical Education & Sport 
PED209 – Adapted Physical Education & Fitness 
PED250 – Kinesiology and Biomechanics 
PED377A – Materials and Methods of Teaching Physical Education 
PED377B – Materials and Methods of Teaching Physical Education 2 
PED395 – Physiology of Exercise and Performance Assessment 
PED422 – Advanced Topics in Physical Education 
EDU497 – Global Education Systems 
EDU498 – Research Paper in Education 
EDU499 – Trauma in Education 


INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  

The Bachelor of Science in Information Technology (BSIT) provides a foundation for students to successfully apply information technology (IT) theory and principles to address real-world opportunities and challenges. Under the guidance of the faculty, the BSIT core enables students to develop knowledge, skills, and abilities in systems analysis, programming, database systems, computer networking, information security, Web technologies, and project management. 
 
Specializations are offered in enterprise networking and cybersecurity. The BSIT establishes a basis for students’ continued career growth and life-long learning as an IT professional. Career opportunities in IT span the full range of computer-related occupations, from technical support specialists to computer operations management. Successful completion of the BSIT prepares the student for graduate studies. 
 
To support the university’s mission, the Information Technology Program endeavors to prepare Information Technology professionals to be effective in a diverse and dynamic Information Technology field. The Information Technology program at Salem University prepares our graduates by providing theoretical, experiential, and applied knowledge to provide solutions for a rapidly growing information technology industry. Salem University and the Information Technology program seek to employ faculty with a wide variety of experiences and education in order to provide expert instruction on the many concepts and principals involved in Computer Science and Information Technology studies. 
 
Program faculty members strive to provide students with a rewarding classroom experience rich in instruction, skills-building, and real-world application. Among other features of the program, this mission-oriented approach ensures that Salem University provides a challenging and robust information Technology program that continues to meet the needs of the student and the industry with a global perspective. With faculty approval, students may elect to repeat courses for additional credit to gain greater depth of understanding. Finally, Salem offers STEM Designated Degree Programs identified by the US Department of Homeland Security, signaling their importance to the Nation and the World. 
LEARNING OUTCOMES 
Graduates will demonstrate the following: 
1)	Ability to apply information technology theory and principles in addressing global business opportunities and challenges. 
2)	Knowledge, skills, and abilities in the area of information technology with an applied, real-world focus. 
3)	Knowledge, skills, and abilities in business management as applied to IT development and operations. 
4)	Ability to communicate information in written, oral, and graphic formats. 
5)	Knowledge, skills, and abilities to enter into advanced studies in IT or business. 
BSIT CORE 
IT110 – IT Essentials 
IT130 – Fundamentals of Computer Graphics 
IT150 – Computer Programming 
IT151 – Computer Programming 2 
IT202 – Internet Publishing 
IT310 – Database Architecture 
IT323 – Methods of Software Development 
IT409 – Basic Networking 
IT445 – IT Project Management 
IT499 – Senior Capstone Project

SPECIALIZATION COURSES 
Specialization courses provide students with a deeper understanding of a specific component or occupation within the major discipline. Specializations require completion of 9 or more credits of advanced courses. 
CYBERSECURITY 
IT405 – Computer Forensics 
IT410 – Enterprise Networking 
IT420 – Information Systems Security 
IT425 – Advanced Cybersecurity 
IT450 – Special Topics  
 
NURSING  

The School of Nursing is committed to lifelong learning, which is an underlying principle of the career advancement pathway (CAP) concept. This fundamental belief is that all levels of nursing are significant and contribute to the delivery of health care in a multitude of meaningful activities. All levels of nursing have common basic principles on which knowledge and experiences can be built. Nursing education proceeds from the simple to the complex. Over the course of their careers, nurses may advance from a certificate in practical nursing to a terminal degree – the Career Advancement Pathway. 
 
Students come to higher education today with diverse educational preparation and needs. This requires many user-friendly entry and exit points to facilitate the quest for a career in nursing. Consideration must be given to academic and career recognition with opportunity at each level. Accordingly, Salem is committed to providing an educational system that meets these goals by providing the career enhancement pathway opportunity. 
*Students enrolled in nursing programs may be responsible for lab fees in accordance with the published bulletin. 
 
VISION OF THE SCHOOL OF NURSING 
The School of Nursing will provide accessible, state-of-the-discipline education. The school will focus on fostering the preservation, promotion, and restoration of health in the international community. Our graduates will be highly competent practitioners who are grounded in a sense of inquiry and committed to human caring across the lifespan within a climate of diversity. 
MISSION OF THE SCHOOL OF NURSING 
The mission of nursing education coincides with that of the University and is committed to preparing professional nurses who utilize a systematic approach in the assessment and management of actual or potential health needs across the life span of a diverse population. A commitment to lifelong learning will serve as the catalyst that propagates career advancement. 
PHILOSOPHY 
The School of Nursing uses key concepts of the nursing paradigm as a way of organizing beliefs about nursing and its role in society. The School of Nursing has defined its core values and concepts with an emphasis on continuous quality improvement, and with a focus on nursing practice standards and professional role behaviors identified by the West Virginia Legislature and the Boards of Examiners, the National League for Nursing, and accrediting bodies. Program goals and learning outcomes for the program are reflective of these components. The core concepts are nursing, person, health, and environment. These 4 central concepts are the metaparadigm of nursing, and the key areas of focus when it comes to patient care. The core values are based on the National League for Nursing values, which are caring, diversity, integrity, and excellence. These core values guide the activities of the School of Nursing. 
NURSING CORE NURSING CONCEPTS 
An art and science that involves protection, promotion, and optimization of health and abilities, prevention of illness and injury, and alleviation of suffering through the diagnosis and treatment of human response, and advocacy in the care of individuals, families, communities, and diverse populations. Nursing encompasses autonomous, collaborative, and holistic care of individuals of all ages and in all settings. It includes evidence-based practice modalities, patient education, promotion of a safe environment, and participation in shaping health policy and health systems management. Lifelong learning is the scaffold for adherence to standards of nursing practice. (Based on definitions by the World Health Organization, International Council of Nurses, and American Nurses Association.) 
PERSON 
The Individual, family, community, or population that is the focus of the nursing process. The person is conceptualized as a holistic being, and includes biological, psychological, emotional, social, spiritual, and cultural dimensions in the context of the environment. 
HEALTH 
Health is a central focus of nursing and is defined by the World Health Organization as a state of complete physical, mental, and social wellbeing, and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity (World Health Organization). 
 
ENVIRONMENT 
Internal and external stimuli or factors that are in constant interaction with the person. The environment surrounds and affects behavior and development of persons and encompasses the global community.  
NURSING CORE VALUES CARING 
Caring is the essence of nursing practice. It is a universal way of being that is characterized by exhibiting empathy, concern, compassion, and respect toward others. Caring is reflected and enhanced by responding to the needs of others in a sensitive manner to preserve health and human dignity, affirm feelings, and creating a supportive and therapeutic environment. 
INTEGRITY 
A personal, social, and professional virtue consisting of a complex set of values that are considered. Integrity is acting in accordance with an appropriate code of ethics and moral principles, and adherence to professional values and accepted standards of practice. 
Integrity is reflected in professional nursing practice when the nurse is honest and provides fully competent and just care to individuals, families, communities, and populations based on an ethical framework that is accepted within the profession of nursing. 
DIVERSITY 
Respect and regard are given to a full range of differences in customs, attitudes, practices, and behaviors that exist among the international community and its group affiliations, including culture, ethnicity, social class, age, gender, religion, physical ability, and roles within an organization. Knowledge of diversity and cultural competency is at the core of high quality patient-centered care and is paramount to eliminating inequities in the quality and availability of care, especially for vulnerable and underserved populations. 
EXCELLENCE 
A dynamic process that involves the use of the best theoretical and practice knowledge for each individual encounter. Excellence in nursing encompasses the provision of evidenced-based care to individuals, families, communities, and populations to promote health and wellbeing through the health illness continuum. Excellence is fundamental to the achievement of optimal health outcomes. Attributes of excellence in nursing include understanding and enacting the full scope of nursing practice; highly developed problem solving, conflict management, and communication skills; the ability to think critically in exercising professional judgment, especially in complex situations; the ability to access the appropriate resources for the best possible care; and a spirit of inquiry reflected by a commitment to lifelong learning. 
  
NURSING CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK 
The conceptual framework is modeled upon a wheel with spokes, as shown in Figure 1. The wheel, like nursing, is confronted with a never-ending variety of tasks, from simple to complex. Both can adapt, utilize the necessary resources, and move toward goal attainment. The many spokes represent practice and professional standards. The core concepts are found at the hub. The surrounding rim is the core values. The wheel represents the cyclic and connected nature of nursing.  
 
Figure 1 
ASSOCIATE OF SCIENCE IN NURSING 
The purpose of the Associate of Science in Nursing (known as the “ASN Program”) is to prepare student nurses, through classroom and clinical education, with the necessary knowledge, skills, and professional values to enter the healthcare field and function at the entry level of practice for registered nursing. 
 
The ASN Program requires the successful completion of a minimum of 66 semester credit hours. Pre-HealthNursing majors must achieve a cumulative grade point average of 3.0 to progress to the ASN Program nursing core courses. Nursing students must earn a “C” or higher in all ASN Program nursing core courses and a cumulative grade-point average of at least 2.5 overall to graduate. In addition, nursing students must meet or exceed the designated passing score on the comprehensive capstone achievement exam to graduate. 
 
Courses follow a logical plan to prepare students for nursing practice in a variety of settings. Concurrent classroom, lab and clinical experiences empower students to gain competencies and use the nursing process to care for infants, children, and adults of diverse cultures across the lifespan. Current concepts in health care and the changing roles of nurses at all levels have been considered in developing and evaluating the curriculum. Special emphasis is placed on specifying measurable, objective, behavioral student learning outcomes. At the successful completion of the program, the student is prepared to take the NCLEX-RN exam for licensure as a Registered Professional Nurse. 
 
 
 

PROGRAM LEARNING OUTCOMES  
 
NLN COMPETENCIES 	ASN PROGRAM LEARNING OUTCOMES (PLOs) 
Nursing Judgement & Sound Decision- Making 	1. Make judgments in practice, substantiated with evidence that integrates critical and reflective thinking, theoretical concepts, scientific knowledge, and the nursing process, in the provision of safe, quality care to promote the health and wellbeing of individuals, families, and communities. (Excellence) 
Professional Behaviors & Identity 	2. Implement one’s role as a nurse, guided by professional standards that reflect integrity, responsibility, professional values, legal and ethical practices, and an evolving identity as a nurse committed to safe, quality care for diverse populations throughout the lifespan and across the continuum of health care environments. (Integrity & Diversity) 
Spirit of Inquiry & Evidence- Based Practice 	3. Examine research and evidence that underlies clinical nursing practice and offer insights to improve the quality of nursing care and health outcomes for patients, families, and communities. 
(Excellence) 
Human Flourishing & Caring 	4. Advocate for individuals and families in ways that promote their self-determination, integrity, and ongoing growth as human beings. (Caring) 
Professional Communication & Collaboration 	5. Use effective communication, collaboration, and mutual respect across disciplines, to establish professional relationships and achieve positive health outcomes. (Integrity, Excellence) 
 
Therapeutic Relationships & Interventions 	6. Determine individual uniqueness and preferences regarding culture, ethnicity, social norms, beliefs, and lifestyles, centered on building and sustaining positive health relationships when designing holistic nursing interventions and providing care. 
(Caring) 
Safe, Effective, Skillful Management of Care 	7. Use human, physical, and technological resources to implement safe, quality, patient- centered care for individuals across the lifespan, families, and communities, and to support desired health outcomes. (Excellence) 
Policies, Access & Quality 	8. Promote access to health services, resources, and quality care for a diverse and vulnerable patient population by incorporating principles of quality and safety, healthcare policy, and cost effectiveness. (Caring, Diversity) 
Continued Professional Growth 	9.Demonstrate a commitment to professional nursing and to lifelong learning by assuming responsibility and accountability for safe quality nursing care, maintaining continued competence, adhering to professional nursing standards, and promoting a positive image of the profession of nursing. 
(Integrity) 
Leadership Management Collaboration 	10. Use leadership and management skills to provide care for individuals, groups, and communities, in collaboration with other health care providers to ensure continuous and holistic care. (Excellence) 

ASN NURSING CORE 
The ASN Program Nursing Core Courses comprise the following: 

NUR111 – Basic Concepts of Nursing 
NUR111EL – Basic Concepts of Nursing
NUR113 Health Assessment for Nursing Practice
NUR115 – Pharmacology and Dosage Calculation 
NUR121 – Medical-Surgical Nursing 1 
NUR121EL – Medical-Surgical Nursing 1 Clinical
NUR122A – Medical-Surgical Nursing 2 
NUR122EL – Medical-Surgical Nursing 2 Clinical
NUR122B – Medical-Surgical Nursing 3 
NUR231 – Maternity, Neonatal, & Pediatric Nursing 
NUR231EL – Maternity, Neonatal, & Pediatric Nursing Clinical
NUR232 – Pediatric Nursing 
NUR241 – Mental Health Nursing 
NUR241EL – Mental Health Nursing. Clinical
NUR251 – Advanced Medical-Surgical Nursing 1 
NUR251EL – Advanced Medical-Surgical Nursing 1 Clinical
NUR252A – Advanced Medical-Surgical Nursing 2 
NUR252EL – Advanced Medical-Surgical Nursing 2 Clinical
NUR252B – Advanced Medical-Surgical Nursing 3 
NUR299 – Nursing Capstone
NUR299EL – Nursing Capstone Clinical

REQUIRED PREREQUISITE COURSES 
The following table lists the required prerequisite courses that must be completed by students prior to entering the ASN Program Nursing Core Courses: 
 
COM101 – Critical Reasoning and Research
BIO210 – Anatomy & Physiology 1 
BIL210 – Anatomy & Physiology 1 Lab
BIO211 – Anatomy & Physiology 2 
BIL211 – Anatomy & Physiology 2 Lab 
BIO217 – Microbiology & Pathophysiology for Health Professionals 
ENG101 – Written English 
MAT109 – College Algebra
PSY100 – Psychology 
SCI105 – Life Science 

Students who have completed the qualifying pre-healthnursing  courses at a previous institution must have transcripts reviewed by the School of Nursing to determine earned transfer credits. Transfer credits for nursing majors are approved only by the Dean of Nursing Health Sciences and/or the Director of Nursing. To graduate from the Associate Degree in Nursing program (“ASN Program”), the student must have an overall cumulative GPA of 2.5 or higher for all courses. 
NATIONAL BACHELOR OF SCIENCE IN NURSING
The National BSN Program at Salem University is an accelerated, practice-focused nursing pathway that combines foundational associate-level nursing coursework with upper-division baccalaureate content into a single, integrated degree track. Designed to be completed in as little as three years, this program provides a streamlined approach for students pursuing a Bachelor of Science in Nursing (BSN) without earning a separate ASN degree.
The curriculum is delivered through a blended model of online didactic instruction and on-ground clinical and lab experiences, allowing for flexibility while maintaining high standards of hands-on learning. Students begin with core nursing courses and progress seamlessly into advanced topics such as leadership, population health, evidence-based practice, and professional nursing concepts.
Key features include:
•	Accelerated completion in approximately three years of year-round study
•	Online and in-person delivery to accommodate diverse learner needs
•	Preparation for the NCLEX-RN licensure exam
•	A comprehensive BSN degree upon graduation
The National BSN program is ideal for students seeking a direct-entry nursing degree that supports clinical readiness, academic progression, and eligibility for graduate nursing education.

NATIONAL BSN CORE COURSES

NUR 111	Basic Concepts of Nursing
NUR 111EL	Basic Concepts of Nursing LAB
NUR113	Health Assessment for Nursing Practice
NUR 115	Pharmacology and Dosage Calculation
NUR 121	Medical-Surgical Nursing 1
NUR 121EL	Medical-Surgical Nursing 1 Clinical
NUR 122	Medical-Surgical Nursing 2
NUR 122EL	Medical-Surgical Nursing 2 Clinical
NUR 404	Legal & Ethical Issues in Nursing and Health Care
NUR 241	Mental Health Nursing
NUR 241EL	Mental Health Nursing Clinical
NURXXX	Introduction to Professional Nursing 
NUR 231	Maternity, Neonatal, & Pediatric Nursing
NUR 231EL	Maternity, Neonatal, & Pediatric Nursing Clinical
NUR 403	Nursing Research
NUR 251	Advanced Medical-Surgical Nursing 1
NUR 251EL	Advanced Medical-Surgical Nursing 1 Clinical
NUR 406	Evidence-Based Practice
NUR 252 	Advanced Medical-Surgical Nursing 2
NUR 252EL 	Advanced Medical-Surgical Nursing 2 Clinical
NUR 407	Special Topics in Nursing
NUR 405	Chronic and Complex Health Problems
NUR 410	Community & Public Health Nursing
NUR 299	Nursing Capstone
NUR 408	Nursing Leadership and Management
NUR499	Capstone
NUR 299EL	Nursing Capstone Clinical


REQUIRED PREREQUISITE COURSES
PRE-HEALTH TO NATIONAL BSN GENERAL EDUCATION PREREQUISITES
COM101 Communications (Critical Reasoning and Research)
ENG101 Written English
SCI105 Life Science 
PSY100 Psychology
MAT109 College Algebra 
BIO210 Anatomy & Physiology 1
BIL210 Anatomy & Physiology 1 Lab
BIO211 Anatomy & Physiology 2
BIL211 Anatomy & Physiology 2 Lab
BIO217 Microbiology & Pathophysiology for Health Professions 
 
PRE-HEALTH TO NATIONAL BSN GENERAL EDUCATION ELECTIVES
ENG102 Written English
BIO123 Human Nutrition
HIS125 World Civilization (II; IV)
SOC110 Introduction to Sociology
MAT140 Statistics (III; IV)
HIS153 U.S. History (II; IV
FNA 202 World Music or ENG200 Research & Writing for Effective Communication
-	Nursing students are required to have ENG200
IT110 or CS110 (III; IV) 
COM102 Professional Communication & Technology
Total Credits Required to Apply for National BSN Program Core Courses is 51


BACHELOR OF SCIENCE IN NURSING 
The Registered Nurse to Bachelor of Science in Nursing (“RN-BSN Program”) is a non-licensure, degree completion program for professional nurses with an active, unencumbered RN license issued by one of the United States or the District of Columbia. The RN-BSN degree program licensed registered nurses that is delivered entirely via distance education with experiential activities. Experiential learning must be completed in-person with oversight from approved preceptor in the United States, unless otherwise approved by nursing administration. Consistent with all baccalaureate programs at Salem, the program requires the successful completion of 120 semester credit hours, including a maximum of 90 transfer credits with a cumulative GPA of 2.5. 
The RN-BSN Program Nursing Core comprises 30 credits (10 courses) that all students must complete with a grade of “C” or higher and a cumulative GPA of 2.5. Each course is four weeks duration; therefore, depending on transfer credits, students may be able to complete their BSN within ten (10) months of continuous, successful enrollment.  
Salem University’s Prior Learning Assessments (PLA) is a procedure used to evaluate and provide university credit for learning amassed outside of the university. PLA is a method utilized by the University that allows students to earn credit for things they have knowledge of and experiences with that may allow these students not to take specific courses in various programs as well as not having to pay the University for PLA credits. This process allows students to achieve their degrees or certifications more quickly when PLA is approved.
PLA Credit is viewed as a form of transfer credit; it shall not be utilized to fulfill institutional residency requirements of 30 credits. Students will be required to successfully complete the minimum number of credits in coursework offered by the college or school awarding their degree.
For our RN-BSN Completion Program (RN-BSN), employment is not necessary to begin the RN-BSN program. However, applicants must have worked a minimum of 500 practice hours by graduation to obtain the 36 experiential learning credits hours for general education courses to apply to the BSN degree. Confirmation of worked hourshours worked must be provided by the students’ employers, along with contact information for supervisory personnel. 
As a professional nurse with an active, unencumbered RN license issued by one of the United States or the District of Columbia, each student will be granted 60 transfer credits. Credits earned at other accredited institutions either beyond or in addition to the ADN program may apply. For RNs who have completed training or courses that carry ACE-recommended college credit, these may qualify. Challenge exams (e.g., CLEP and DSST) may apply. Documented, corroborated, relevant prior work experience, training, and military service will be evaluated on an individual basis by the Admissions Committee in the School of Nursing, the Dean of NursingHealth Sciences and/or the Director of Nursing Education or designee(s). See the Transfer Credit Section of the Academic Policies, Procedures & Practices chapter of this catalog for more information. There is collaboration with the Registrar’s Office on transfer credit evaluation.
PROGRAM LEARNING OUTCOMES 
Graduates of the RN-BSN program will: 
 
1)	Integrate general education and scientific knowledge, technology proficiency, and information literacy to support critical, creative, and reflective thinking and sound decision-making in nursing practice and policy development. (Nursing, Person, Health, Integrity, Caring, Excellence) 
2)	Synthesize nursing and health care theories and concepts and apply these to practice for positive and holistic health outcomes across the life span and across the continuum of health care environments. (Nursing, Person, Health, Environment, Diversity, Excellence) 
3)	Apply leadership & management skills to facilitate high quality, safe and effective care to individuals, families, groups, and communities. (Nursing, Person, Caring, Integrity, Diversity, Excellence) 
4)	Use professional communication and collaboration across disciplines to coordinate the delivery of care, promote and restore health, and prevent illness, especially in complex situations. (Nursing, Person, Health, Environment, Caring, Diversity, Excellence) 
5)	Incorporate international, cultural, ethnic, and socially diverse concepts to foster individualized patient-centered care and facilitate positive health outcomes. (Nursing, Person, Health, Environment, Caring, Diversity) 
6)	Apply evidence-based research and the nursing process to guide and improve nursing practice, with attention to professional development and lifelong learning. (Nursing, Person, Health, Integrity, Excellence) 
7)	Promote and maintain professional values and legal, ethical, and moral aspects of nursing to support and advance safe, high quality nursing practice. (Nursing, Person, Environment, Caring, Integrity, Excellence) 
8)	Evaluate healthcare policy and services based on standards of nursing practice and establish patient health and safety goals to advocate for, and promote quality and accessible care, particularly for vulnerable and underserved populations. (Nursing, Person, Health, Environment, Caring, Integrity, Diversity, Environment) 
RN-BSN PROGRAM NURSING CORE COURSES 
The RN-BSN program requires the successful completion of 10 courses (30 semester credits): 

NUR401 – Professional Role Transition 
NUR402 – Health Assessment 
NUR403 – Nursing Research 
NUR404 – Legal and Ethical Issues in Nursing and Health Care 
NUR405 – Chronic and Complex Health Problems 
NUR406 – Evidence-Based Practice 
NUR407 – Special Topics and Issues in Nursing 
NUR408 – Nursing Leadership and Management 
NUR410 – Community and Public Health Nursing 
NUR499 – Nursing Capstone

RECOMMENDED ELECTIVES 
In addition to the above 10 courses (30 credits), Salem offers several general education (liberal arts) courses that will broaden the graduates’ knowledge, skills, and abilities. A student with no transfer credits beyond the associate degree typically will be advised to complete the following courses to earn a total of 120 credits required for the degree: 
 
COM104 – Human Communication 
ECO255 – Survey of Economics 
ENG200 – Research and Writing for Effective Communication 
ENG203 – Multicultural Literature 
FNA202 – World Music OR FNA203World Art 
HIS125 – World Civilizations 
HIS210 – World Geography 
HIS305 – American Foreign Policy 
MAT140 – Statistics 
PSC100 – American Government & Society

NURSING ADMISSIONS 
Admission to each of the nursing programs has specific requirements with respect to academic qualifications, transfer credits, immunizations, criminal background checks, references, and so forth. For more information on applying for admission to the School of Nursing, contact the Admissions Department to arrange an interview or to visit the campus. 
   
GRADUATE PROGRAMS OF STUDY  
 

GOALS OF GRADUATE EDUCATION 
 
Salem is committed to providing a high-quality graduate education to all students without regard to race or color, sex, sexual orientation, veteran status, religion, age, disability, national origin, creed, ancestry, or political affiliation. The goals of graduate education are: 
•	To provide effective educational experiences leading to marketable graduates, skilled in their respective areas; 
•	To design and maintain a unique environment conducive to developing an international citizen; 
•	To select, support, and develop human resources consistent with excellence in leadership, scholarship, and work and life skills; 
•	To promote the acquisition of competencies that lead to the development of leaders in the world; 
•	To provide opportunities for professional growth and development; and 
•	To develop skills that allow the graduates to conduct research, integrating theory and practice. 
 
Salem offers several graduate programs: Doctor of Business Administration (DBA), Master of Business Administration (MBA), Master of Science in Criminal Justice (MSCJ), Master of Science in Health and Human Performance (MSHHP), Master of Science in Information Technology (MSIT), and Master of Science in Nursing (MSN). The School of Education offers a post-master’s certificate of advanced studies (CAS) in Educational Leadership leading to advanced licensure. 
The school also offers a Master of Education (M.Ed.) in Curriculum & Instruction and an M.Ed. in Educational Leadership. 
Master’s degrees require completion of at least 30 semester credits, including up to 50% transfer credits.  The M.Ed. in Curriculum & Instruction requires 30 credits. The M.Ed. in Educational Leadership requires 30 credits. The Ed.S. in educational leadership requires 30 post-master’s degree credits. The CAS in educational leadership prepares the students to pursue principal licensure at the completion of 18 credits and general supervisor and superintendent licensure at the completion of 24 credits. The minimum cumulative GPA to graduate is 3.0. 
BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION  
 

The School of Business and the programs of study it offers support the Mission of the University to provide a high-quality, high-value education to graduate students who are seeking initial career entry or to advance in their careers. The Master of Business Administration (MBA) provides a broad education in the fundamentals of business administration with specializations to provide in- depth learning opportunities in support of specific occupational goals of students. 

MISSION OF THE SCHOOL OF BUSINESS 
The School of Business utilizes strong leadership, strategic planning, stakeholder input, data driven decision making, quality faculty and staff, and student-centered processes to provide excellent programs to both undergraduate and graduate business majors. 
DOCTOR OF BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION 
Salem University offers the Doctor of Business Administration (“DBA”) for working professionals as an extension of and complement to the Master of Business Administration (“MBA”). The DBA students are expected to define a timely topic in their area; plan and conduct research and evaluation tasks grounded in a deep understanding of theory, current practices, and professional standards; analyze the quantitative and/or qualitative data gathered objectively and without bias; and present their findings to diverse stakeholders in ways that are relevant and understandable to their target audiences. Accurate, articulate professional communications in writing and orally are a minimum expectation for all work submitted in fulfillment of the requirements of the DBA. Publications and presentations to add to   the disciplinary body of knowledge also are encouraged.

For additional information and complete requirements, please refer to the Salem University Doctor of Business Administration Student Handbook. 
Program Learning Outcomes 
Upon completion of the DBA program, graduates will have demonstrated the knowledge, skills, and abilities:
1.	To develop, conduct, evaluate, and present applied research that addresses practical         business problems.
2.	To present analytic and evaluative information using professional communication skills to establish recommendations and reinforce strategic goals and outcomes, conveying organizational vision and actionable plans to guide progress.
3.	To compare-and-contrast leadership theories, selecting those that enhance core business functions and are consistent with evidenced based leadership practices.
4.	To employ problem-based research methods to enhance leadership decision- making. 
Completion of the Doctoral Research Project 
Doctoral students begin working on the doctoral research project from the first course in the program, and the goal is for them to complete by the end of the final doctoral research course in the program. Once doctoral students have completed all requirements and have only the doctoral project to complete, they may enroll for extension research courses for one year (MGT 830A, MGT 830B, MGT 830C) after which they must leave the program if they have not completed. A total of four years is allowed for the completion of the program (including any extensions that have been granted). In documented extenuating circumstances, Doctoral students can appeal for further extensions to the leadership of the program, which will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. 
The following table illustrates the course-by PLO crosswalk. 

 
Semester One – 16 weeks total – 15 total credits 
MGT705 	4 weeks 	The Craft of Dissertation Research & Writing 	3 credits 
MGT725 	4 weeks 	Current Issues in Leadership 	3 credits 
MGT715 	4 weeks 	Management as a Behavior Science 	3 credits 
MGT712 	4 weeks 	Program and Project Evaluation 	3 credits 
MGT805 	16  weeks concurrent 	Introduction to Dissertation Research 	3 credits 
 
Semester Two – 16 weeks total – 15 total credits 
MGT760 	4 weeks 	Ethics 	3 credits 
MGT790 	4 weeks 	Organizational Development & Change Management 	3 credits 
MGT710 	4 weeks 	Research Methods 	3 credits 
MGT777 	4 weeks 	Analytical Case Study Methods 	3 credits 
MGT800 	16 weeks  concurrent 	Dissertation Proposal 	3 credits 
 
Semester Three – 16 weeks total – 15 total credits 
MGT750 	4 weeks 	Economic and Financial Theory 	3 credits 
MGT755 	4 weeks 	Strategy and Business Policy 	3 credits 
MGT796 	4 weeks 	Leadership in Global and Multicultural Organizations 	3 credits 
MGT765 	4 weeks 	Legal & Regulatory Environment of Business 	3 credits 
MGT810 	16 weeks   concurrent 	Dissertation Research 1 	3 credits 
 
Comprehensive Exam 
Dissertation Research, Analysis, Presentation, & Defense – 6 total credits 
MGT820  	Custom 	Dissertation Research 2 	3 credits 
MGT830 	Custom  	Dissertation Research 3 	3 credits 
TOTAL 	51 CREDITS  

Once a doctoral student has completed all of the required course work and has only the dissertation, including the proposal, to complete, they must declare themselves All But Dissertation (ABD). To do that, the student and department should complete an All But Dissertation Status Agreement form to declare their intent to complete their dissertation either In Residence (on campus) or In Absentia (off campus).  All But Dissertation students generally have 2 years to complete their dissertation (their department or college policy may require a shorter period). The time limit applies to all students and begins on the date a student matriculates in the doctoral program. An All But Dissertation Agreement Form can be completed upon request from the Program’s Dean.

MASTER OF BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION 
Salem offers the MBA on campus in West Virginia, blended in West Virginia and Indiana, and via distance education worldwide. Students complete the core curriculum consisting of 21 core semester credits and one specialization consisting of 9 credits. 
 
The core curriculum provides a foundation across the key functional areas of business administration such as management, accounting, finance, and marketing. Specializations are offered that allow students to gain additional knowledge, skills, and abilities that are focused on occupations, such as general management, health care management, project management, sales management, and sports and recreation management. The capstone course enables students to demonstrate their ability to make decisions with integrity, informed by economic, legal, ethical, and global perspectives. 

PROGRAM LEARNING OUTCOMES 
Graduates of the MBA will demonstrate the following: 
1)	Ability to integrate skills, concepts, and strategies for effective business leadership and management. 
2)	Technical competencies for succeeding in a global business economy. 
3)	Mastery of business vocabulary for effective communication in a global economy. 
4)	Mastery of the components of the essential elements of change management. 
5)	Ability to apply knowledge, skills, and abilities in solving business problems. 
MBA CORE 

ACC515 – Accounting for Managers 
BUS500 – Applied Business Statistics 
BUS600 – Organizational Behavior, Leadership, and Ethics 
ECO570 – Managerial Economics 
FIN560 – Financial Management 
MKT530 – Marketing Management 
BUS699 – Enterprise Strategic Planning and Change Management

SPECIALIZATION COURSES 
Specialization courses provide students with a deeper understanding of a specific component or occupation within the major discipline. Specializations require completion of 9 or more credits of advanced courses. 
FINANCE
FIN510 – Advanced Corporate Finance 
FIN525 – Applied Portfolio Theory 
FIN540 – Financial Analysis 

HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
BUS671 – Strategic Human Resource Planning and Ethics 
BUS672 – Talent Acquisition and Employee Development and Compensation 
BUS670 – Global Challenges of Communications and Human Resources Management 
OR
BUS673 – Negotiation and Conflict Resolution

INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY MANAGEMENT 
BUS660 – Management Utilization of Technology (elective) 
ITM510 – Database Administration 
ITM680 – Business Intelligence, Data Analytics, and Decision-Support Systems

INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS 
BUS640 – International Law and Public Policy 
BUS650 – Global Business Operations 
FIN520 – International Finance

MANAGEMENT 
BUS633 – Project Management and Budgeting 
BUS660 – Management Utilization of Technology 
BUS670 – Global Challenges of Communications and Human Resources Management
 
PROJECT MANAGEMENT 
BUS620 – Foundations of Project Management 
BUS621 – Project Performance and Measurement 
BUS633 – Project Management and Budgeting


SPORTS AND RECREATION MANAGEMENT 
SMG601 – Economics of Sports and Recreation 
SMG602 – Sports and Recreation Finance 
SMG604 – Sports and Recreation Planning, Promotion, and Evaluation  


CRIMINAL JUSTICE  
 MASTER OF SCIENCE IN CRIMINAL JUSTICE 
The core curriculum covers a range of topics that are relevant to advanced studies in the discipline. Specialization courses provide the opportunity for students to focus on topics relevant to their aspirations and career goals. The capstone course enables students to demonstrate their ability to make decisions with integrity, informed by economic, legal, ethical, and global perspectives. 
PROGRAM LEARNING OUTCOMES 
Graduates of the MSCJ will demonstrate the following: 
1)	Analyze criminological theory within the context of current research findings to identify ways to improve decision-making or to implement new practices or procedures. 
2)	Evaluate criminal justice policies to critique both intended and unintended consequences and the ethical principles in current criminal justice management and practices. 
3)	Create researchable questions and apply appropriate statistical methods to improve evidence-based decision-making. 
4)	Distinguish unique management problems and challenges in the field of criminal justice, offering support for administrative policy-making. 
MSCJ CORE 
CJU505 – Criminological Theory 
CJU510 – Research Methods in Criminal Justice 
CJU515 – Criminal Justice Policy Analysis 
CJU520 – Ethics in Criminal Justice Management 
CJU535 – Management in Criminal Justice Organizations 
CJU598 – Research Project in Criminal Justice 
CJU599 – Capstone

The capstone sequence comprises two courses: 
•	CJU598 involves a research project directed at the student’s specialization and geared toward the higher orders of Bloom’s Taxonomy of evaluate and create. The projects may include but are not limited to analyses of secondary data, case studies, surveys of criminal justice professionals, or action research by practitioners. 
•	CJU599 involves a comprehensive portfolio review that addresses the students’ attainment of program learning outcomes. Students are to apply program learning outcomes to their specialization and self-evaluate their growth in relevant knowledge, skills, and abilities. The summative evaluation process will entail an independent assessment of the students’ portfolios by faculty and may include interviews or require the submission of additional evidence of learning and achievement at the discretion of the faculty. 
SPECIALIZATION COURSES 
Specialization courses provide students with a deeper understanding of a specific component or occupation within the major discipline. Specializations require completion of 9 or more credits of advanced courses. 
CRIMINAL JUSTICE ADMINISTRATION 
CJU540 – Advanced Constitutional Law 
CJU545 – Law Enforcement and the Community 
CJU550 – Special Topics in Criminal Justice Administration

FORENSIC SCIENCE 
CJU570 – Forensic Toxicology 
CJU580 – Forensic Biology 
CJU585 – Criminal Profiling 

GRADUATE SCHOOL OF EDUCATION  
 The School of Education offers the Master of Education (M.Ed.) in Educational Leadership; and a M.Ed. in Curriculum and Instruction (C&I). The Master of Education (M.Ed.) is a professional degree program for practicing educators committed to their own professional development as 21ST Century educators in the classroom, school building, or school district. The degree consists of both licensure and non-licensure specialization paths designed to add to the expertise of PK–12 educators. 
Educational Leadership – Prepares graduates for advanced licensure in West Virginia as PreK-Adult Principal, General Supervisor, or Superintendent. 

EDUCATIONAL LEADERSHIP 
The Master of Education (M.Ed.), and the post-masters Certificate of Advanced Studies (CAS) in Educational Leadership programs prepare the graduate for advanced licensure as a principal at the elementary, middle, and high school levels; a general supervisor of instruction at all programmatic levels; or a superintendent of schools. 
 
 
The M.Ed. in Educational Leadership requires the successful completion of 30 post-bachelor’s credits to qualify for principal licensure or 36 post-bachelor’s credits to qualify for principal, district supervisor, and superintendent licensure. 
 
Graduate students may elect to enroll in any of the courses offered to earn a degree, work toward re-certification of a professional license, or update their knowledge for continuing professional education. Course content is aligned to the following national standards: 
•	West Virginia Professional Teaching Standards (WVPTS) 
•	Educational Leadership Constituent Council (ELCC) 
•	Praxis® Test 5412 Content Topics 
•	International Society for Technology Education (ISTE) Standards for Teachers 
•	International Society for Technology Education (ISTE) Standards for Administrators 
•	National Educational Leadership Preparation (NELP) Program Standards 
 
Students in the Educational Leadership programs are enrolled in one or three two-month internship field experience courses (EDU664, EDU674, or EDU684), during which they may be permitted to enroll in an additional class to be taken simultaneously with the field experience course. Students in the post-masters Ed.S. and CAS Educational Leadership programs who are enrolled in a two-month field experience course (EDU764, EDU774, or EDU784) may be permitted to enroll in an additional class to be taken simultaneously with the internship course. To receive approval for the additional class, all tuition and fees related to the course must be paid prior to registration. Additionally, Salem may limit the number of credits in which a student may register in one semester. 
 
Total credits include transfer credits to a maximum of 50 percent of the required hours. Students must earn a cumulative GPA of at least 3.0 for all courses completed at Salem to graduate. 
LEARNING OUTCOMES 
The Salem Educational Leadership program learning outcomes are aligned to and built upon the ELCC (2011) Standards and the NELP (2018) Standards. 
 
Building-Level and District education leaders understand and demonstrate the capacity to promote the current and future success and well-being of each student and adult by applying the knowledge, skills, and commitments necessary to: 
 
1.	Collaboratively lead, design, and implement a school/district mission, vision, and process for continuous improvement that reflects a core set of values and priorities that include data use, technology, values, equity, diversity, digital citizenship, and community. 
 
2.	Understand and demonstrate the capacity to advocate for ethical decisions and cultivate and enact professional norms and culture. 
 
3.	Develop and maintain a supportive, equitable, culturally responsive, and inclusive school/district culture. 
 
4.	Evaluate, design, develop, cultivate, and implement coherent systems of curriculum, learning, instruction, data systems, supports, assessment, and instructional leadership. 
 
5.	Understand and engage families, communities, and school personnel and other constituents in the work of schools and the district in order to strengthen student learning, support school improvement, and to advocate for school, district, student, and community needs, and external leadership. 
 
6.	Develop, monitor, evaluate, and manage data-informed and equitable schools and district systems to improve management, communication, technology, school and district-level governance, and operations, resources, and human capital management, to develop and improve data-informed and equitable school and district resource plans and to apply laws, policies, and regulations. 
7.	Cultivate and build relationships, lead collaborative decision-making and governance, build the school’s and district’s professional capacity, engage staff in the development of a collaborative professional culture, and improve systems of staff supervision, evaluation, support, and professional learning, and represent and advocate for school and district needs in broader policy conversations. 
MASTER OF EDUCATION IN EDUCATIONAL LEADERSHIP 

EDU505 – Research Methods 
EDU570 – Curriculum Development 
EDU580 – Analysis and Evaluation of Instruction 
EDU640 – Public School Finance and Administrative Applications 
EDU655 – Professional Development Leadership 
EDU670 – Instructional Leadership 
EDU691 – Technology Competencies for Educational Leaders 
EDU652 – School, District, and Community Leadership 
EDU680 – School Law and Administrative Applications 
EDU664 – Professional Practices of the Principal 
EDU674 – Professional Practices of the District Supervisor (required for district supervisor and superintendent licensure) 
EDU684 – Professional Practices of the Superintendent (required for district supervisor and superintendent licensure) 

POST-MASTER’S CERTIFICATE OF ADVANCED STUDIES IN EDUCATIONAL LEADERSHIP 

The Post-Master’s Certificate of Advanced Studies (CAS) in Educational Leadership prepares the student to become a principal at the elementary, middle, and high school levels; a supervisor of instruction at all programmatic levels, a district supervisor, or superintendent of schools. When the student completes 18 credits, they are prepared for advanced licensure as principal. Completing all 24 credits prepares graduates for advanced licensure as principal, general supervisor, and district supervisor or superintendent. 

EDU740 – Public School Finance and Administrative Applications 
EDU752 – School, District, and Community Leadership 
EDU770 – Instructional Leadership 
EDU780 – School Law and Administrative Applications 
EDU791 – Technology Competencies for Educational Leaders 
EDU764 – Professional Practices of the Principal 
EDU774 – Professional Practices of the District Supervisor (required for district supervisor and superintendent licensure) 
EDU784 – Professional Practices of the Superintendent (required for district supervisor and superintendent licensure)
 
ADMINISTRATIVE LICENSURE WEST VIRGINIA ADMINISTRATIVE LICENSURE REQUIREMENTS 
Upon completion of the Educational Leadership programs at Salem, candidates will be eligible for the West Virginia Professional Administrative Certificate as PreK-12 Principal or PreK-12 Principal, Supervisor of Instruction, and Superintendent after completing an additional state- specific training (Evaluation Leadership Institute). Current West Virginia licensure requirements include completing: 
•	All Salem program requirements, including coursework with a grade of “C” or higher for all courses taken at Salem; 
•	The required credit hours, including transfer credits, with a cumulative GPA of at least 
•	3.0 for all courses taken at Salem; 
•	Praxis Test 5412 content exam with a score of at least 146; and 
•	Participation in the Evaluation Leadership Institute (ELI) offered by the West Virginia Center for Professional Development (ONLY for students applying for actual licensure in West Virginia). 
Achieving the required Praxis 5412 score is a requirement of the Salem University School of Education and the State of West Virginia. Graduation from the MEd or completion of the CAS requires successful completion of Praxis Test 5412. 
 
The ELI is a State of West Virginia requirement for licensure. Neither Praxis nor ELI can be waived or excused by Salem University. Salem Educational Leadership students are not required to complete the ELI as a requirement for graduation from the MEd or completion of the CAS. 
 
At any time during the program of study at Salem, students seeking West Virginia licensure must complete initial online training for evaluation of professional personnel in West Virginia public schools (formerly called Evaluation Leadership Institute - ELI). This is a mandatory requirement for West Virginia certification/licensure as identified in West Virginia Policy 5202. A copy of the completion certificate must be uploaded with your application for licensure/certification. For information regarding this requirement, please contact: 
 
WV Department of Education, 
Division of Support and Accountability, 
Office of Leadership and System Support 
Jessica Austin, Coordinator, jessica.austin@k12.wv.us, 304-558-3199 
 
The application for West Virginia licensure must be made within one year after completing the program of study. After this time period, applicants for licensure will be required to meet any Salem programmatic changes or new requirements enacted by the State of West Virginia. 
ADMINISTRATIVE LICENSURE IN OTHER STATES 
Students seeking licenses in other states may have additional requirements to meet. Candidates seeking certification in other states should familiarize themselves with their state’s requirements. 
HIGH MORAL CHARACTER 
PLEASE BE AWARE: West Virginia State Law regarding licensure requires Salem University to attest in writing that the applicant for licensure is of “high moral character” (Form 19- Professional Administrative Certification). DO NOT jeopardize the institution’s ability to sign this certification on your behalf by demonstrating poor judgment during your program of study. 

HEALTH AND HUMAN PERFORMANCE  
 The mission of the Master of Science (MS) in Health and Human Performance is to provide graduate level academic instruction that incorporates evidence-based practice in both theory and application in the fields of Strength and Conditioning and Fitness and Wellness. The program will serve as a means to educate professionals interested in improving athletic performance and creating optimal fitness and wellness programs for the general population and special populations. The direction of the program will stem from the standards put forth by the National Strength and Conditioning Association (NSCA). The NSCA is a regionally accredited organization that leads the way in health and human performance. 
 
Students who enroll in the Fitness and Wellness concentration will be prepared to sit for the regionally accredited certification in personal training (NSCA-CPT). Students who enroll in the Strength and Conditioning specialization will be prepared to sit for the regionally accredited strength and conditioning specialist certification (NSCA-CSCS). The core content within the curriculum includes leadership and psychology of sport, Research methods in health and human performance, advanced physiology, applied sports science, applied anatomy, fundamentals of nutrition, Bodyweight management for disease prevention, and Fitness and Wellness leadership. 
 
The 36-credit Master of Science Degree in Health and Human Performance aligns with industry standards and the National Strength & Conditioning Associations (NSCA) certifications in Strength and Conditioning and Personal Training. The NSCA is an NCCA accredited institution recognized as the gold standard in Strength Coaching and Personal Training. All MS students are required to complete the core classes (21 credits) that include human movement science, exercise physiology, advanced nutrition, anatomy, sports psychology, and complete a capstone in the Research Methods course. The program has three 15-credit specialization options (1) Fitness and Wellness and (2) Strength and Conditioning, and (3) Sport Coaching Education. Students who enroll in the Fitness and Wellness specialization will be prepared to sit for the NSCA-CPT exam. 
 
Students who enroll in the Strength & Conditioning Specialization will be prepared to sit for the NSCA-CSCS exam and be required to take a 3 credit Practical Laboratory Experience at an NSCA accredited facility. 

PROGRAM LEARNING OUTCOMES 
Graduates of the MSHHP program will demonstrate the following: 
 
1)	Formulate knowledge in the exercise sciences including anatomy and physiology, exercise physiology, human movement science, biomechanics, exercise testing and programming, sports science, and nutrition 
2)	Evaluate scientific inquiry in health and human performance methodology to collaborate in ways that strengthen the role of the fitness professional to promote excellence and innovation for optimal quality performance. 
3)	Summarize health & human performance applications to promote high quality practical application that emphasizes the integration of ethical practices and professional standards to resolve problems and enhance educational learning. 
4)	Appraise the different human performance technologies available to deliver collaborative instruction at the highest level of performance and coaching to advocate strategies to promote positive client outcomes and influence optimal health. 
5)	Synthesize current evidence-based practice and culturally appropriate professional practices to promote optimal health utilizing the full scope of the masters prepared health and human performance specialist. 
HHP CORE 
HHP600 – Human Movement Science 
HHP601 – Biomechanics for sport and Exercise 
HHP602 – Fundamentals of Nutrition Science 
HHP603 – Exercise and Sport Psychology 
HHP604 – Movement & Skill Acquisition 
HHP605 – Advanced Exercise Physiology 
HHP606 – Research Methods in Health and Human Performance/Capstone

SPECIALIZATION COURSES 
Specialization courses provide students with a deeper understanding of a specific component or occupation within the major discipline. Specializations require completion of 9 or more credits of advanced courses. 
STRENGTH AND CONDITIONING 
HHP610 – Sports Needs Analysis, Movement Screening & Assessment 
HHP611 – Scientific foundations of Strength & Conditioning (NSCA CSCS Prep course 1) 
HHP612 – Applied Strength & Conditioning principles (NSCA Prep course 2) 
HHP613 – Power and Speed for Sports Performance (NASE) 
HHP614 – Practical Internship Experience

FITNESS AND WELLNESS 
HHP615 – Preparation for Health and Fitness Professionals (NSCA CPT Prep Course 1) 
HHP616 – Functional Assessment and Exercise prescription (NSCA Prep Course 2) 
HHP617 – Fitness & Wellness Business Marketing Strategies 
HHP618 – Current Topics in Fitness & Wellness 
HHP619 – Corporate Wellness & Fitness

SPORT COACHING EDUCATION 
HHP620 – Foundations of Sport Coaching 
HHP621 – Psychology of Coaching 
HHP623 – Analysis of Sport Performance for Coaches 
HHP624 – Ethics and Diversity in Sport Coaching 
HHP625 – Contemporary Issues in Sport Coaching  

INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
  

MASTER OF SCIENCE IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
The Master of Science in Information Technology (MSIT) provides a foundation for students to apply information technology (IT) theory and principles to address real-world opportunities and challenges. The MSIT establishes a basis for students’ continued career growth and life-long learning as an IT professional. Successful completion of the MSIT requires the student to complete 30 semester credits comprising 10 courses, all of which are online. This course load includes the student’s choice of one (1) specialization of 9 credits. Students may request approval to complete a specialization from the MBA program (eg, Project Management). 
To support the university’s mission, the Information Technology Program endeavors to prepare Information Technology professionals to be effective in a diverse and dynamic Information Technology field. The Information Technology program prepares our graduates by providing theoretical, experiential and applied knowledge to provide solutions for a rapidly growing information technology industry. 
Program faculty members strive to provide students with a rewarding learning experience rich in instruction, skills-building, and real-world application. Among other features of the program, this mission-oriented approach ensures that the University provides a challenging and robust Information Technology program that continues to meet the needs of the student and the industry with a global perspective. 
LEARNING OUTCOMES 
Graduates will demonstrate the following: 
 
1)	Ability to apply information technology theory and principles in addressing global business opportunities and challenges. 
2)	Knowledge, skills and abilities in the area of information technology with an applied, real- world focus. 
3)	Knowledge, skills and abilities in business management as applied to IT development and operations. 
4)	Ability to communicate information in written, oral, and graphic formats. 
5)	Knowledge, skills, and abilities to enter into advanced studies in IT or business. 

MSIT CORE 
IT500 – Business Foundations and Processes 
IT510 – Information Technology and Project Management 
IT520 – Risk Assessment and Management 
IT530 – Disaster Recovery and Continuity Planning 
IT550 – Information Technology Architecture and Security 
IT640 – Database Administration 
IT699 – Enterprise Administration (Capstone Project)

SPECIALIZATION COURSES 
Specialization courses provide students with a deeper understanding of a specific component or occupation within the major discipline. Specializations require completion of 9 or more credits of advanced courses. 
CYBERSECURITY 
	IT610 – Information Systems Security 
	IT620 – Intrusion Detection and Prevention 
	IT630 – Security Policies and Procedures

DATA ANALYTICS 
IT650 – Business Intelligence, Data Analytics, and Decision Support Systems 
IT660 – Big Data Analysis for Information Security 
IT670 – Predictive Analytics 

NURSING  
 

The School of Nursing is committed to lifelong learning. Please refer to the Undergraduate Programs of Study, Nursing for discussions of: 
•	Vision of the School of Nursing 
•	Mission of the School of Nursing 
•	Philosophy 
•	Core Concepts 
•	Core Values 
•	Conceptual Framework 
MASTER OF SCIENCE IN NURSING 
Master of Science in Nursing (MSN) program builds upon the student’s baccalaureate nursing education and professional experience to prepare them to advance in their careers. The program requires the successful completion of 30 semester hours, including transfer credits, with a cumulative GPA of at least 3.0 for all courses completed at Salem. 
Admission is limited to students who have a current unrestricted RN license issued by a State or the District of Columbia and a Bachelor of Science in Nursing (BSN) from an accredited institution with a cumulative GPA of at least 2.5 on a 4.0 scale. An unencumbered RN licensure must be maintained throughout the program of study. 

LEARNING OUTCOMES 
 
Graduates of the MSN program will be able to: 
 
1)	Synthesize advanced knowledge from the sciences, humanities, informatics and technologies, and evidence basedevidence-based research findings as a foundation for advanced nursing roles (Nursing, Excellence). 
2)	Analyze and critique outcome data using critical thinking, systematic inquiry, and sound judgment to develop strategies that support advanced practice nursing care across the lifespan and across the continuum of health care environments (Nursing, Environment, Excellence). 
3)	Promote legal and ethical principles, professional values, and standards of safe advanced nursing practice to improve health outcomes and services to individuals, families, and populations (Health, Person, Environment, Caring, Integrity). 
4)	Advocate for health policy and financing that promote, preserve, and restore public health, particularly for diverse, vulnerable and underserved populations (Nursing, Health, Caring, Diversity). 
5)	Design strategies that promote professional role development in advanced nursing and lifelong learning for continued professional growth (Nursing, Integrity, Excellence). 
6)	Evaluate cultural, ethnic and socially diverse concepts to improve availability, delivery and outcomes of health care in a multi-cultural environment (Nursing, Person, Caring, Diversity). 
7)	Employ advanced knowledge and skills in leadership, collaboration and communication to develop strategies that influence continuous quality improvement and safety in health care organizations and systems (Nursing, Environment, Diversity, Excellence). 
CURRICULUM 
The MSN curriculum is intended to foster an increased sense of professionalism while focusing on nursing theory, research and technologies, evidence-based practice, safety and quality improvement, as well as policy and issues that are presenting in the health care industry today. Courses are designed to prepare professional nurses for leadership in nursing administration or nursing education in academic or clinical settings. The program builds on six (6) Core courses that are complemented by four (4) specialization courses designed to prepare students in their chosen specialization in nursing administration or nursing education. 
 
The mission and conceptual framework are integrated throughout the curriculum plan and are reflected in the evaluation methods. Students complete a capstone scholarly project on a significant issue or problem related to nursing administration or nursing education. There is a final evaluation of the student’s cumulative learning portfolio by designated nursing faculty members. At the successful completion of the program, students are prepared to move forward in their nursing career. 

MSN CORE 
MSN505 – Theoretical Basis & Role Development for Advanced Nursing 
MSN510 – Advanced Research, Inquiry, and Evidence-Based Practice 
MSN515 – Health Care Policy, Law, and Ethics 
MSN520 – Leadership in Health Care Environments 
MSN525 – Health Care Informatics and Technology
MSN599 – Capstone

SPECIALIZATION COURSES 
Specialization courses provide students with a deeper understanding of a specific component or occupation within the major discipline. Specializations require completion of 9 or more credits of advanced courses. 
NURSING ADMINISTRATION 
MSN550 – Organizational Behavior and Workforce Management 
MSN555 – Finance and Economics for Nursing Leadership 
MSN560 – Complex Health Systems Planning and Resource Management 
MSN565 – Population Health Management, Quality Improvement, and Safety 
 
NURSING EDUCATION 
MSN570 – Curriculum and Program Development 
MSN575 – Instructional Methods and Strategies in Teaching and Learning 
MSN580 – Assessment, Evaluation, and Accreditation in Nursing Education 
MSN585 – Educational Technology 

CONTINUING EDUCATION AND INTEGRATIVE HEALTH WORKSHOPS  
 
Salem University offers a wide range of certificates for current professionals who are continuing their education or who wish to sit for various certification exams. 
Foundations in Behavioral Therapy 
The series of three courses will enable interested, but untrained, individuals with no autism- specific experience or higher education degrees to be introduced to the important work and practice new skills. Each week will profile a current Bierman RBT and their suggestions: “A Day in the Life of Registered Behavior Technicians (RBTs).” 
 
The program will develop a robust RBT workforce that can grow into the roles that require a Bachelor’s or Master’s degree (in patient care or back office). As students’ progress through each course, in cohorts of 5-30 learners, they will receive incentives and a certificate of completion. 
 
The main goals of the Foundations of Behavioral Therapy Program are to introduce the following information and skills: 
•	Overview of Autism Spectrum Disorders 
•	Developmental Psychology 
•	Behavioral Psychology 
•	Communication 
•	Empathy 
•	Intro to RBT 
•	RBT Test Preparation 




Foundations in Behavioral Therapy Courses 
	ABA101 	Foundations of Applied Behavioral Therapy 
ABA101L Clinical Placement Practicum (On-the-Job Training/Internship) ABA102 Applied Behavior Analysis   
Incident Command System 
Salem University offers specialized training in the Incident Command System and its role in supporting the National Incident Management System (NIMS). The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has identified these courses as critical to train personnel capable of implementing all functions of emergency management. This training aligns with the NIMS core curriculum to ensure it adequately trains emergency and incident response personnel to all concepts and principles of each NIMS component. 
 
ICS-300 – Intermediate ICS for Expanding Incidents – Training and resources for personnel who require advanced knowledge and application of the ICS. This course expands upon information covered in the ICS-100 and ICS-200 courses. 
ICS-400 – Advanced ICS – Training and resources for personnel who require advanced application of ICS. This course expands upon information covered in ICS-100 through ICS-300. 
 
In order to be eligible to take ICS300 and ICS400, students complete the following courses through FEMA’s training website (https://training.fema.gov/nims/): 
 
IS-700 – NIMS, an Introduction – This independent study course introduces the NIMS concept. NIMS provides a consistent nationwide template to enable all government, private-sector, and nongovernmental organizations to work together during domestic incidents. 
 
IS-800 – National Response Framework (NRF), an Introduction – The course introduces participants to the concepts and principles of the NRF. 
 
ICS-100 – Introduction to the Incident Command System – This independent study course introduces ICS and provides the foundation for higher level ICS training. It describes the history, features and principles, and organizational structure of the system. This course also explains the relationship between ICS and NIMS. 
 
ICS-200 – Basic Incident Command System for Initial Response – This independent study course is designed to enable personnel to operate efficiently during an incident or event within the ICS. ICS-200 provides training and resources for personnel who are likely to assume a supervisory position within the ICS. 
Workforce Education & Readiness Center (WERC) 
The Workforce Education & Readiness Center (WERC) offers courses leading to certification in a number of areas in business and IT. Some certificates are delivered through the university’s partnership with Acadeum and Coursera. 
Certified Financial Planner (CFP) 
The program is recognized and registered with the CFP Board of Standards Inc. Once a student completes the certification program, they will be eligible to sit for CFP certification examination. 
General Principles – Prepares the student with knowledge, skill and abilities to become a successful financial planner including an understanding of ethical standards and creating financial plans. 
 
Insurance Planning – The students will understand and can demonstrate knowledge in the areas of many types of insurance (Life, auto, disability, homeowners and more). The goal of the course is to train prospective financial planners on how to avoid or mitigate all types of risk. 
 
Investment Planning – The course will educate prospective financial planners in the development of client portfolios, the valuation of securities such as stocks and bonds, analyzing opportunities, tax consequences, risk tolerance, minimizing risk and performance evaluation. 
Income Tax Planning – The course will allow the students to demonstrate knowledge in tax hazards, tax planning, calculation of tax, tax returns, penalties, divorce implications, property sales, information gathering and more. 
Retirement Planning – The prospective planner will demonstrate knowledge of tax deferred accounts, retirement planning, employee benefits and social security, pension distribution options, group insurance, 401ks and other company sponsored accounts. The student will understand how to gather all of the client’s retirement information and develop a comprehensive plan. 
 
Estate Planning – The student will demonstrate an understanding of estate planning and the requirements to develop effective plans. The overall effect and considerations of heirs, estate, beneficiaries, and trusts will be covered. The valuation of property, estate fees, gift tax, costs and deductions will be discussed. The course will emphasize wills and assets transferred by the deceased. Trusts, powers of attorney, probate and life insurance as an estate planning tool will also be discussed during the course. 
Capstone – Using a case study approach, students will demonstrate all the knowledge and skills taught within the preceding six courses. The aim is to put the student in the financial planning role and simulate real-life experiences. The course will also serve as a preparatory venue for readying students for the CFP certification examination. 
Certified Associate Project Manager (CAPM) 
The CAPM certificate program will include coursework to prepare students to sit for and pass the CAPM certification exam. The Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK) is used to guide delivering the coursework. 
 
CAPM I – 13 contact hours 
CAPM II – 10 contact hours 

Salesforce Administrator Career Certificate 
Students learn to build dashboards, generate reports, and improve business processes for sales, business development, and customer success roles. Students also gain the customer relationship management (CRM) skills needed for thousands of Salesforce admin jobs. This certificate is offered in partnership with Pathstream and Salesforce and includes career coaching. This certificate program is aligned with the Salesforce administrator credential exam. The certificate consists of the following courses: 
SLF400 Customer Relationship Management for Business 
SLF401 Introduction to Salesforce Administration 
SLF402 Advanced Topics in Salesforce Administration 
SLF403 Applied Business Solutions with Salesforce
MGT362 	Operations Management  
INTEGRATIVE HEALTH INSTITUTE 
Integrative Health Coaching Certification of Completion  

The Integrated Health Coach program is a certificate of completion. The certificate program provides basic competency in core coaching skills for working with a diverse set of clients, with a specific focus on integrative health. The course will foster self-awareness and self-discovery through exploration of mindfulness and personal growth to create an integrative approach to wellness. 
 
Through a blend of theoretical and practical learning experiences, students will explore the latest research and best practices in health coaching, as well as gain the skills necessary to create effective, personalized health and wellness plans for clients with complex health conditions. Students will learn facilitation of client self-awareness and coaching for behavior modification strategies through the application of wellness assessment tools and motivational skills. The program is designed to serve and educate professionals interested in coaching others to optimal health and wellness. Students will develop the skills necessary to build the coaching relationship from start to finish. 
 
Students will take (2 courses). Each course is 8 weeks long. All students will take IHI509 and IHI510. These courses included asynchronous learning and 3 hours of synchronous learning each week. Graduates of this program are eligible to apply for the HWC Certifying Examination to become National Board CertifiedBoard-Certified Health & Wellness Coach (NBC-HWC). 
Program Outcomes: 
•	Summarize the structure of health and wellness coaching including planning, goal setting, assessments, and client relationship building. 
•	Apply techniques for building the coaching relationship, assessing, and motivating behavioral change, and establishing client self-efficacy. 
•	Analyze the role of the wellness coach in health promotion, chronic disease prevention, and education of social and behavioral risk factors to optimal wellness. 
•	Discuss professional conduct, ethics and legal considerations for health and wellness coaching. 
•	Evaluate coaching clients, analyze behavioral and motivational tools particular to each client, and create a coaching plan for clients. 

Integrative Health and Healing Certificate of Completion 
The Integrative Health and Healing program is a 12-credit hour graduate-level certificate of completion. Students will examine health, wellness, and illness from a holistic perspective. This approach involves comparing, connecting, and integrating conventional, alternative, and complementary approaches to promote health and wellness to prioritize prevention, well-being, and healing. The program begins by introducing students to the cultural belief systems of patients and practitioners while exploring diverse allopathic, complementary, and alternative healing practices and protocols for achieving optimal health and wellness. Students will explore the five major types of complementary and alternative medicine including alternative medical, mind/body, biology-based treatments, manipulative and body-based methods, and energy therapies. This program provides a map to assessing and creating protocols for a whole-person approach in the promotion of wellness or the management of chronic illness. Structure 
Students will take a total of 12 credits (4 courses). Each course is 8 weeks long. All students will take IHI500, IHI501, IHI502, and IHI504. 
Program Outcomes 
•	Evaluate the fundamental principles and trends in the field of integrative health. 
•	Develop a solid knowledge base of the five major types of complementary and alternative medicine: alternative medical, mind-body, biology-based treatments, manipulative and body-based methods, and energy therapies. 
•	Examine the interconnectedness of mind, body, and spirit of the human system. 
•	Explain the complex role of nutrition in human biochemistry, physiology, illness, and health. 
•	Assess the impact of ecological, agricultural, dietary, and cultural practices as it relates to health and nutrition. 
•	Explore body-based techniques such as chiropractic and osteopathic manipulation, massage, reflexology, Rolfing, Alexander technique, craniosacral therapy, and other bodywork including health outcomes and research evidence. 
•	Discuss the principles and practices of energy therapies and whole-body systems. 
Holistic Nutrition Certificate of Completion 
The Holistic Nutrition Certificate is a 12-credit hour graduate-level certificate of completion. The certificate program is predicated on identifying the four markers of well-being: nutritional, physical, emotional, and environmental wellbeing. In this course, you will learn the foundational principles of plant medicine including the use of herbs and essential oils in integrative health and healing. Students will learn the markers of wellbeing, how to test them, and interventions to improve their patients’ vitality and wellbeing. Students will learn a map to assessing and creating protocols to a whole-person approach in the promotion of wellness or the management of chronic illness. 
Program Outcomes 
•	Explore herbal history, philosophy, and principles of practice. 
•	Learn the innate properties of herbs and herbal pharmacology. 
•	Describe what aromatherapy is and how it can be utilized in an integrative practice. 
•	Identify essential oils, their history and origins, biosynthesis, methods of production, shelf-life, storage, and handling. 
•	Apply the principles of the Healing Matrix to wellness, gut function, immunity, stress physiology, and pain management. 
•	Consider tests and lab markers for condition. 
•	Evaluate the appropriate tests for determining the wellbeing of each marker. 
•	Implement a decision and treatment flow to create a program for supporting each marker. Structure 
Students will take a total of 12 credits (4 courses). Each course is 8 weeks long. Students will take IHI505-IHI508. Courses will be taught asynchronously. 
Structure 
Students will take a total of 12 credits (4 courses). Each course is 8 weeks long. Students will take IHI550, IHI551, IHI552 and IHI553. 
Program Outcomes 
•	Analyze dominant theoretical models that seek to explain how meaning is created, knowledge is acquired, and how transformational learning transfers 
•	Identify key theories of human consciousness and transpersonal psychology, exploring multiple heuristics of personal development. 
•	Identify basic beliefs and ideologies that underlie cultures and societies across time. 
•	Critically examine the role and impact of humanistic and transpersonal approaches in psychology, comparing their theoretical foundations. 
•	Examine the states and stages of consciousness as developed and promulgated by notable thinkers in the emerging field of human consciousness. 
•	Analyze how the power of consciousness through the processes of intuition, intention, flow, and manifestation, lead to the accomplishment of goals and outcomes. 
Education Learning and Thinking Certificate of Completion 
The Education Learning and Thinking certificate is an 18-credit graduate-level certificate of completion designed for learners who seek opportunities to discover the sources and processes of thinking, learning, and creating meaning. The program’s content develops students’ abilities to analyze and synthesize a wide spectrum of academic experiences for the purpose of extrapolating personal meaning(s) and for extending worldviews through the internalization of selected conceptual frameworks. The specialization focuses on the study of cognitive and metacognitive strategies, developmental psychology, socio-emotional learning, and with applications to classroom teaching. 

Program Outcomes 
•	Identify the origin and nature of personal and cultural beliefs and assumptions. 
•	Explain the unique epistemological and aesthetic lenses through which individuals create meaning. 
•	Investigate rational, intuitive, mystical, and selected trans-rational ways of knowing (i.e., understand and appreciate process learning and the perceptual processes of individuals in diverse disciplines such as science, music, art, religion. 
•	Analyze concepts in holistic and transdisciplinary contextual frame works to explain how a systems theory approach to complexity of real-world events, crises, and phenomena provide insights for creating a holistic and sustainable planetary ethic. 
•	Conduct supervised research that forwards students’ knowledge of the concepts and ideas inherent in learning and process thinking. 
Structure 
Students will take a total of 18 credits (6 courses). Each course is 4 weeks long. Students will take EDU520, EDU521, EDU523, EDU524, EDU525, and EDU526.  
ACADEMIC POLICIES, PROCEDURES & PRACTICE S  
 STUDENT LEARNING OUTCOMES ASSESSMENT 
Salem is committed to academic quality and continuous quality improvement and has developed a plan for the assessment of student learning outcomes. The purpose of the student outcomes assessment program is to provide a process of continuous evaluation of all available information concerning the students, the educational programs, and the educational environment. The data are used to help the institution ascertain the degree of change in students’ learning and to form valid judgments about the students' growth, the effectiveness of the educational programs, and the environment. The ultimate goal of student outcomes assessment is to improve teaching and learning and the quality and effectiveness of the overall Salem educational experience. 
STUDENT RESPONSIBILITY 
Students are responsible for knowing their academic standing as it relates to the published policies and procedures of Salem. This responsibility includes knowing the practices and protocols of the school or program of study in which a degree is being earned as well as any program handbooks that may be published. 
STUDENT BEHAVIOR 
Salem University encourages discussion and academic debate as an essential intellectual activity. It is essential that students learn to express and defend their beliefs, but it is equally essential that they learn to listen and respond respectfully to others whose beliefs they may not share. The University will always tolerate diverse, unorthodox, and unpopular points of view, but will not tolerate condescending or insulting remarks. When students verbally abuse or ridicule and intimidate others with whose views they do not agree, they subvert the free exchange of ideas that should characterize a university course. 
If students’ actions in a course, either in person or online, are deemed by the faculty to be disruptive, the students will be subject to appropriate disciplinary action. Such disciplinary action may include the students’ being involuntarily withdrawn from the class. 
 
All students are bound by the Salem University Student Code of Conduct, which is included in its entirety herein by reference. Violations of the Code should be brought to the attention of the Provost or the Director of Campus Safety and Security. (See Telephone Directory above.) Serious or repeated violations may result in sanctions up to an including expulsion or dismissal from the university. 
GRADUATION REQUIREMENTS 
To graduate, students must complete all of the requirements for their degree or certificate successfully. 
UNDERGRADUATE 
Bachelor’s degrees are awarded upon successful completion of at least 120 credit-hours as specified for the program. Students may need to take more than 120 credits to complete the requirements of their chosen majors (including change in major) or to remedy skill deficiencies. A minimum of 30 of these credit hours must qualify as general education. 

Associate degrees are awarded upon successful completion of at least 60 credit-hours as specified for the program. Students may need to take more than 60 credits to complete the requirements of their chosen majors (including change in major) or to remedy skill deficiencies. A minimum of 15 of these credit-hours must qualify as general education for the Associate of Applied Science or 24 credits for the Associate of Arts or the Associate of Science. 

A cumulative grade-point average (GPA) of at least 2.0 is required for graduation from the University with an associate or baccalaureate degree. In addition, a minimum GPA of 2.25 is required in the student's major. Specific programs may impose higher GPA standards as shown in the catalog or in program handbooks. 
GRADUATION WITH HONORS 
Latin honors are awarded to baccalaureate graduates based on sustained high achievement, as indicated by cumulative grade-point average at the completion of the degree requirements: 
•	summa cum laude: 3.90 to 4.0 
•	magna cum laude: 3.70 to 3.89 
•	cum laude: 3.50 to 3.69 
GRADUATE 
A cumulative GPA of 3.0 is always required. Specific programs may impose higher GPA standards as shown in the catalog or in program handbooks. 
DIPLOMAS 
Soon after graduation, the university orders diplomas for students who have fulfilled their degree requirements. Printing takes about 8 weeks. Signing, shipping, and handling take several more weeks.   

GRADUATION FEE 
A graduation fee of $100.00 will be charged to cover graduation expenses during the students’ last term, beginning May 1, 2024. 
TRANSCRIPTS 
Unlike a diploma, a transcript is official proof of graduation. Transcripts may be ordered from the Office of the Registrar in person or online at www.salemu.edu. There is a nominal fee. Graduates must be in good financial standing with the university to receive a transcript.  
DEAN’S LIST 
Each semester, undergraduate students with a grade point average of 3.50 – 3.79 are eligible for this honor. The student must have completed at least 9 credits in the semester. The Dean’s List is published promptly upon the completion of each semester and distributed via email and hardcopy. 
 
PROVOST LIST 
Each semester, undergraduate students with a grade point average of 3.8 – 4 are eligible for this honor. The student must have completed at least 9 credits in the semester. The Provost List is published promptly upon the completion of each semester and distributed via email and hardcopy. 
NORMAL TIME TO COMPLETION 
In conformance with Federal guidance, Salem has established normal time to completion for the various programs as follows: 
 
•	Associate’s degrees: two (2) years 
•	Bachelor’s degrees: four (4) years 
•	Master’s degrees or graduate-level certificates: two (2) years 
•	Doctorate: three (3) years 
DEGREE-COMPLETION TIME LIMITS 
Students who are enrolled in an associate degree program must complete their work within six (6) years of time enrolled in courses. Students enrolled in a baccalaureate degree program must complete it within six (6) years after the completion of the associate degree or within twelve (12) years of time enrolled in courses overall. Students who are enrolled in master’s degree, graduate-level certificate must complete their work within six (6) years of time enrolled in courses. Students in doctoral programs are allotted seven (7) years to complete the program; in rare instances extensions may be granted for up to three (3) additional years. 
PARTICIPATION IN COMMENCEMENT 
All students in good standing within 6 credits of degree completion and a GPA consistent with program degree requirements are eligible to participate in the commencement ceremony. (For the exact dates, see the Academic Calendar at the end of this catalog.) 
Students participating in Commencement must indicate their intention to participate as directed in communication from the commencement committee and by requested deadlines. Students who do not meet the requirements for graduation or who do not communicate their intent by the deadline may not participate in the ceremony. 
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY AND PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT 
Academic integrity is highly valued and expected at Salem University. If a student or faculty member uses the ideas or words of another without giving a proper citation, they are responsible for committing plagiarism. Plagiarism is a serious example of academic dishonesty. Academic dishonesty includes, but is not limited to, cheating on assignments or assessments, using unauthorized materials, sharing test questions or answers, intentionally and unintentionally falsifying a document or assignment. Assisting another student to cheat, to plagiarize, or to falsify assignments is considered academic dishonesty. Documented plagiarism by students will result in a minimum penalty of failure for the assignment, but it can result in more severe sanctions. Additional sanctions for academic dishonesty by students include probation, suspension, expulsion, and dismissal from the University. Academic dishonesty by faculty members will be handled as per the Faculty and Employee Handbooks. 
CLASS LEVELS 
Undergraduate students who have earned at least thirty (30) credits have achieved sophomore class level. Students achieve junior class level when they have earned at least sixty (60) credits. Students have attained senior class status when they have earned at least ninety (90) credits. 
GRADING SYSTEM 
The academic performance of students is reported using letter grades and grade-point averages. 

GRADE	QUALITY POINTS PER CREDIT HOUR	SCORE RANGE	SCORE RANGE FOR NURSING
A	4.0	90-100%	93-100%
B	3.0	80-89%	85-92%
C	2.0	70-79%	77-84%
D	1.0	60-69%	70-76%
F	0.0	Less than 60%	Less than 70%
P	Pass		
SP	Satisfactory Performance		
W	Withdraw		
WF	Withdraw Failing		
WP	Withdraw Passing 		
X or AU	Audit		
I	Incomplete		
TR	Transfer Credit		

 
Salem policy requires calculated scores to be rounded to two significant decimal digits before conversion to whole percentages (e.g., 0.8855 is 89%, not 88.55%). 
 
Pass: “P” or “SP” indicates the student passed the class. A “Pass” does not affect the calculation of grade point average. “SP” indicates Satisfactory Performance and is usually applied to fieldwork, clinical learning experiences, internships, or other hands-on learning. These qualify for transfer credit. 
 
Withdrawal: “W”, “WF”, or “WP” indicates a student withdrew from a class. A withdrawal is not included in the calculation of the grade point average and does not qualify for transfer credit. Audit: “X” or “AU” indicates that the student audited a class. No credits or quality points are issued. A final grade of “X” or “AU” cannot be converted to any other grade as the decision to audit a course is irrevocable by academic policy. 
 
Incomplete: An “I” is an unofficial grade that indicates the student was unable to complete course requirements prior to or by the end of a course; and, therefore, they submitted a Student Request for a Grade of Incomplete form. (This form is available on campus and via Blackboard in the Syllabus Addendum menu.) All requests for a grade of Incomplete will be approved or denied by the course faculty. If approved, it is the responsibility of the course faculty to identify the timeline and requirements to satisfy the awarding of an official final grade for the course. If the Incomplete is granted, it is the student’s responsibility to notify the course faculty when all requirements for the Incomplete have been submitted and are ready for assessment. Note that a grade of “I” will be converted automatically to an “F” by the University Registrar 90 days after the official last day of the class if official notification is not received from the course faculty indicating the requirements for replacement of the Incomplete with a Final Grade have been met. An additional extension in time may be granted by the appropriate program leader or the Provost in rare situations. An “I” is counted in credit hours attempted, which may affect financial aid decisions regarding satisfactory academic performance; however, it is not an official grade, it is not included in the calculation of academic grade point average, and it is not counted in total credit hours earned. 
 
Transfer Credit: Transfer credits are not included in the calculation of the Salem grade point averages and the original grade is not shown on the Salem transcript. All transfer credits are shown with a grade of “TR”.  grades of “C” or higher are eligible for graduate credit. Transfer credit is awarded solely at the discretion of the University. 
HANDLING GRADES OF INCOMPLETE 
Course faculty are responsible for managing the incomplete process. It is the faculty’s decision to approve or deny a formal request for a grade of incomplete that is submitted in writing by the student. A formal request requires the submission of the Student Request for a Grade of Incomplete form. This form is available on campus and via the Blackboard learning management system in the Syllabus Addendum menu. 
 
All communication related to this process must utilize in-person communication (classroom- based) or “Messages” within the course on Blackboard. Do not use Salem or personal email. This requirement ensures proper records are kept. 
 
If a student formally requests an incomplete using the appropriate form and modality, the faculty has two choices: 

•	Approve – If the faculty approves the request, then the faculty must document the work to be completed and the timeline for doing for the student’s reference. The faculty and the student are expected to negotiate in good faith with sincere mutual agreement on the means of completing the course. The faculty will forward the approved incomplete form to Provost.Office@salemu.edu. Note: Any grade of “I” submitted on a final grade sheet should have a corresponding approved Request for Incomplete form on record in the Office of the Provost. 
•	Deny – If this is the faculty’s decision, then the faculty must notify the student and explain why. The faculty is required to inform the student that they have the right to appeal this decision. If the student wants to appeal the decision, they should write a letter (email is acceptable) explaining the request for the appeal. This letter or email should be sent directly to the Office of the Provost using the following address 
Provost.Office@salemu.edu. The Office of the Provost can be contacted by telephone for any questions related to the process. (See Telephone Directory above.) 
ACADEMIC GOOD STANDING 
The minimum cumulative GPA required for academic good standing varies according to the student’s class level and program of study. Class level is based on the number of credit-hours earned. To remain in academic good standing, a student’s cumulative GPA must be equal to or greater than the minimum for their respective class levels, as shown in the following table: 




CLASS LEVEL	TOTAL CREDIT HOURS
EARNED (INCLUDING
ACCEPTED TRANSFER
CREDITS)	MINIMUM CUMULATIVE
GPA REQUIRED FOR
ACADEMIC GOOD
STANDING *
Freshman	0–30	1.6
Sophomore 	31–60	1.8
Junior 	61–90	2.0
Senior 	90 or More	2.0
Master’s 	0-36	3.0
Post-Master’s 	0-30	3.0
Doctorate 	0-51	3.0

The Bachelor of Science in Education, ASDN Program, and RN-BSN Program have higher cumulative GPA requirements. See the relevant program handbook for additional details. 
Academic Probation: A student whose cumulative GPA falls below the minimum is subject to academic sanctions. Cumulative GPA is calculated at the end of each semester by the Office of the Registrar. If the student has less than the minimum cumulative GPA they will be placed on Academic Probation for the next semester. If the student regains the minimum cumulative GPA by the end of the next semester, they will regain academic good standing. 
If a student’s cumulative GPA were to fail to achieve the criteria for academic good standing by the end of the academic probation semester, the student may be: 
•	Continued on Academic Probation if the semester GPA is 2.0 or higher undergraduate or • 3.0 or higher graduate; 
•	Continued on Academic Probation if the student has made significant progress, as determined by the student’s program director, toward Academic Good Standing; or 
•	Placed on Academic Suspension. 
 
The student will be notified of the decision in writing by certified letter or email. A copy will be kept with the student’s file.  
 
Academic Suspension: A student on Academic Suspension is not allowed to enroll in courses for at least one academic semester. After sitting out for one (1) course, students on Academic Suspension may apply for early re-entry to the Office of the Provost. The Request for Re-Entry form must be used requiring (1) an explanation of why the student was not able to meet the criteria for Academic Good Standing; and (2) a description of what has changed in the student's situation that will enable them to meet the criteria for Academic Good Standing. 
 
Supporting documentation should be submitted to support claims of adverse circumstances contributing to poor performance that were beyond the student’s control. A decision will be made by the student’s Program Director. The Office of the Provost will advise the student of the decision in writing. A copy will be kept with the student’s file. 
 
If the request is denied by the student’s Program Director, the student may appeal the decision to the Office the Provost. The student request will then be heard by an Academic Appeals Committee appointed by the Provost. If the request is granted, the student’s program director will then guide the student through the Academic Plan process. 
 
If the request is denied by the Academic Appeals Committee, the student does not have the right of additional appeal. They may not resume classes until the period of suspension expires.  
 
Academic Plan: If the request for early re-entry is granted by the student’s Program Director, then the student will be placed on Academic Probation for the next semester and allowed to continue enrollment. The Program Director will document the requirements the student must meet in a written Academic Plan. It will include a timeline for specific academic achievement that may extend beyond one semester if necessary to ensure the student will be able to complete the program with the required cumulative GPA for graduation. The student's achievement will be evaluated using the Academic Plan as a reference. If the student fails to meet the requirements of the Academic Plan, which will be evaluated at the end of each semester, then the student will be placed on Academic Suspension and will not be allowed to submit another early re-entry request. 
SEMESTER BASIS 
Salem operates on a semester basis. Three (3) full semesters of 16 weeks’ duration are offered each academic year: Fall (September-December), Winter (January-April), and Summer (May- August). Each semester is 16 weeks’ duration. This schedule also is known as trimesters by the US Department of Education. During a standard period of non-enrollment (SPNE), typically over the summer, students may enroll in Summer Session 1 (May-June) or Summer Session 2 (July- August) if necessary, academically or upon request. 

ACADEMIC COURSE SCHEDULE 
Salem prepares its academic course schedule throughout the year to meet the needs of all students. Students are registered for classes prior to the start of each semester, and courses are offered on a regular schedule throughout the year. 
CHANGE OF SCHEDULE 
The University reserves the right to change faculty, classroom, or class time of any class. Salem may cancel any class if enrollment, personnel, or physical conditions demand such a cancellation.  
CLASS ATTENDANCE 
Although Salem as an institution is not required to take attendance and does not require faculty to take daily attendance, students are expected to benefit most from their educational opportunities by attending all scheduled lectures, laboratories, and any other class sessions as well as completing all assignments on time. Similarly, students taking courses by distance education are expected to log on and participate regularly, at least several times per week, and are responsible for completing all assignments on time. 
 
Students must establish attendance for each course by the end of the first week of the course. This requirement ensures the student qualifies for financial aid and is in compliance with institutional and other policies and procedures. Students will establish attendance through completion of a quiz (or other appropriate level of course engagement). Students must complete a two-step procedure to establish attendance: 1) they must login to the learning management system; 2) they must complete the Quiz. The Registrar ensures both steps are completed before documenting attendance. Students and faculty are encouraged to substantively engage on the first day of the course. The university may extend the time limit for establishing attendance at the direction of the President. Class absences may be excused by the faculty for health reasons, participation in university- sponsored activities, attendance at an important family event, transportation delays, job interviews, etc. Faculty, Deans, and/or Directors will consult on matters pertaining to student absences. Individual schools and departments may require student attendance and may require additional documentation for missed events as outlined in their school or department handbooks. A student whose absence has been excused is responsible for contacting the instructor and for making arrangements to make up the missed work as soon as possible. Faculty members have no obligation to permit a student to complete work that was missed due to an unexcused absence. In addition, the nature of some coursework (e.g., clinical learning experiences or fieldwork) may make it impossible to do make-up work. 
 
Students are responsible for reading and understanding the grading and other requirements as stated in their course syllabi. The grading policies of individual faculty members may take class participation into consideration, which shall be stated in the syllabus and clearly explained. 
 
Attendance policy specific to the School of Nursing and the School of Education are in the individual program handbooks. These policies provide additional information related to field and clinical site placements for licensure requirements in each program. 
Policy Statement
 	This policy applies to all Salem University students, including both on-campus and online learners. As professionals, students are responsible for managing their learning experiences and maximizing educational opportunities, an essential mark of professionalism. All students are required to establish attendance by completing the "Before Class Begins" module within Blackboard on the first day (Week 1) of each course. Failure to establish attendance within the first week may result in administrative withdrawal from the course.  The attendance policy applies without exception, including the enrichment courses offered at Salem University.
Active participation is essential for success in both online and on-campus courses. A lack of participation may negatively impact grades, as engagement is a critical component of learning. Students should complete all assigned course activities, including enrichment assignments, to demonstrate ongoing engagement. Participation in all required activities is required for assessing student learning and engagement throughout the course.
Students are expected to access their courses daily and actively engage in the learning environment to achieve mastery of course content. Completing weekly assignments is crucial for acquiring new knowledge and mastering learning objectives. Adequate preparation is vital to fully benefit from each session and course. 
Attendance Requirements:
•	All students must establish attendance by completing the “Before Class Begins” module within Blackboard by Day Two (Tuesday) of week 1 for each course.
•	 Failure to establish attendance during the first week of class may result in administrative withdrawal from the course.
Procedure for Attendance Confirmation:
1.	Log into the Blackboard course.
2.	Navigate to the "Before Class Begins" section.
3.	Complete the entire module, including completing the syllabus quiz and participating in Discussion 1 within the module.

Participation Expectations:
•	Active participation is essential to both online and on-campus courses and is a key factor in determining academic success. Lack of participation may negatively impact grades.
•	Completion of all assigned course activities and assignments is required to evaluate engagement throughout the course.
•	Participation in all assigned activities is required for assessing student learning and engagement.
By adhering to these guidelines, students contribute to a meaningful and professional educational experience that supports academic success and engagement.
This policy applies to all Salem University students, including both on-campus and online learners. As professionals, students are responsible for their own learning experiences and for making the most of all educational opportunities—an essential mark of professionalism. All students must establish attendance through Blackboard course, “Before Class Begins” module on Day 1 of each course.  Failure to establish attendance according to the guidelines in the Blackboard the university’s learning management system during the first week of class may result in the student being dropped from the course.

 Student participation is an important part of online and on-campus courses; the lack thereof can result in a poor grade. All assigned course activities must be completed and required, your participation confirms attendance in the course. All course activities and courses assignments, should be completed to assist in determining student engagement throughout the course.  This policy also applies to the enrichment courses.

Students are expected to access their courses daily. Students are also expected to engage in the learning environment in a manner that will permit mastery of course content. Completing the assignments each week facilitates the acquisition of new knowledge and mastery of the course content. Adequate preparation is essential to gain the most from each course. Adequate preparation is essential to gain the most from the sessions. If at any time a student is having difficulty with the course content or feels a need for more individualized attention, it is expected that the student will contact the course instructor to make an appointment for an individual conference. Students can also seek assistance from Tutor.com and the writing center. Students are responsible for notifying the instructor and their advisor if a situation requires an extended absence.


CANCELLATION OF CLASSES ON CAMPUS DUE TO INCLEMENT WEATHER 
Should it be necessary for the University to close the West Virginia campus due to weather conditions, the following procedures will be followed: A decision will be made by the administration concerning cancellation or delayed start as early as possible. Radio stations WKKW FM 97.9, TV stations WBOY and WDTV, and University Security may be called to report any cancellation. All academic and support service offices and functions may be closed at the discretion of the Administration.  
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ON CAMPUS 
If there were to be a significant emergency or dangerous situation involving an immediate threat to the health or safety of students or employees on campus, the Emergency Response Team, comprising of several executives and senior administrators, will be responsible for assessment and implementation of emergency procedures. Emergency procedures include evacuations, lockdowns, shelter-in place, crowd control, and coordination with responding emergency services. 
 
Salem University uses a commercial mass notification system called e2CampusOMNILERT to distribute crucial information during emergency situations. Notices and updates are distributed via SMS messages, email, and telephone calls. Students are automatically registered into the e2CampusOMNILERT system upon successfully enrolling with the university; however, individuals have the option to not receive SMS (text) messages. Specific information on emergency management can be viewed in the Annual Security Report and Fire Safety Report that is published online and distributed each year.  
CREDIT HOURS AND COURSE LOADS 
Undergraduate students must enroll in a minimum of 12 semester credit hours per term to be considered full-time. The standard load per term for undergraduates is 15 credits. Students may enroll in more than 15 credit hours in a semester only with the prior permission of the Provost. Graduate students must enroll in a minimum of 6 semester credit hours per term to be classified as full-time. The standard load per term for graduate students is 12 credits. Students may enroll in more than 12 credits in a semester only with the prior permission of the Provost. 
 
Typically, each course is four weeks’ duration and earns three (3) semester credit hours. Salem defines credits in terms of Carnegie Units: For each credit hour, classes will maintain a minimum of 15 lecture hours; 30 lab hours; or 45 fieldwork, clinical, or practicum hours. 
STUDENT SCHEDULE CHANGES 
Changes in program schedules due to withdrawing from courses or non-continuous enrollment may affect the time required to complete a degree, the financial aid received by a student, and athletic eligibility. Therefore, it is the responsibility of students to check with the Registrar’s Office to ensure that changes made in their enrollment will not negatively affect their ability to complete their desired degree in a timely manner. Students should realize that changes in enrollment that lead to a reduction in the number of credits attempted can affect financial aid and athletic eligibility.  

TRANSFER CREDIT 
Students requesting evaluation of their prior academic records for transfer credit must submit copies of the relevant transcript(s). A preliminary, draft transfer credit award may be provided based on transcript copies; however, final award is contingent on receipt of official transcripts to substantiate the claims. An official transcript is one that is sent directly to Salem’s Office of the Registrar by the prior institution or a third-party contracted by the prior institution to provide this service. 
 
Students are expected to ensure Salem’s timely receipt of the official transcripts. For most students, the official transcripts are expected to arrive during the first semester of enrollment. Veterans are advised to provide official transcripts in 30-60 days of enrollment per Veterans Administration regulations. 
 
Failure to provide official transcripts may result in the rescission of draft transfer credit award previously reported to the student. Salem will make a good faith effort, working with the student, to obtain the needed transcripts. However, Salem cannot accept responsibility for the consequences of no or untimely replies by prior institutions that jeopardize the final transfer credit awarded. Responsibility for obtaining transcripts remains with the student seeking transfer credit for prior academic accomplishments. 
 
Transfer credit may be granted solely at the discretion of the university. Credits may be transferred that have been earned at an accredited institution of higher education. For institutions located in the U.S., the institution must be accredited by an agency that is recognized by the 
U.S. Department of Education. Salem may accept credits earned at institutions offering higher education outside of the U.S. if the institution is recognized and approved by the appropriate government organization or an appropriate accrediting body that certifies the institution's programs. The decision to award transfer credit will be made by the faculty, represented by the academic deans or directors, with support by the Office of the Registrar as needed. The School of Nursing has sole discretion over transfer credits that will be awarded to nursing majors. 
CREDIT BY EXAMINATION 
Students may be granted credits by completing standardized tests, including without limitation the Advanced Placement (AP), the College Level Examination Program (CLEP), DSST (DANTES Subject Standardized Tests), the International Baccalaureate (IB), and other credit-by- examination programs. Students interested in credit by examination should refer to the Catalog Bulletin for any applicable fee information. 
 
Students who receive a score of 3 or higher on AP examinations may receive academic credit as determined by the Registrar, in consultation with the appropriate department. Students who participate in the IB diploma program may be granted credit for any scores of 4 or higher. 
DUAL CREDIT 
Students may be granted credits for completing dual credit courses in high school. Such courses are college-level courses offered to high school students while they are still in high school, allowing them to earn credit for both. 

EVALUATION OF TRANSFER CREDIT 
The evaluation of transfer credit will be informed by the principles set forth in the Joint Statement on the Transfer and Award of Credit developed by members of the American Association of Collegiate Registrars and Admissions Officers (AACRAO), the American Council on Education (ACE), and the Council for Higher Education Accreditation (CHEA). Salem will award transfer credit for all earned credits to the extent practicable within the framework of the university’s academic policies and program requirements. The cumulative GPA calculated by Salem for the aggregate of all transfer courses accepted, either as a block or individually, must be at least 2.0 undergraduate or 3.0 graduate. Advanced undergraduate credits with grades of “B” or higher may comprise up to 15 transfer credits toward relevant master’s degrees, whether the courses were completed at Salem or elsewhere. 
 
Individual programs may set stricter limits on transfer credit. If programs do so, the program is responsible for providing full disclosure via their handbook(s) or other widely available materials or media (including the Salem web site, as appropriate) that will clearly and completely inform potential students prior to their signing an enrollment agreement or matriculating. Admissions may be contacted to arrange receipt of this information on restricted transfer credits by programs. ACE recommended credits for training and experience as shown on an official transcript or similar record of achievement will be evaluated to provide transfer credit for all earned credits to the extent practical with the framework of the university’s academic policies and program requirements. Members, veterans, and retirees of the United States Armed Forces, including the Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Air Force, and Coast Guard as well as the Public Health Service (PHS) Commissioned Corps and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric (NOAA) Commissioned Officer Corps must submit copies of their official service transcripts for review. Official transcripts must be provided by the Army/ACE Registry Transcript System (AARTS), the Sailor/Marine ACE Registry Transcript (SMART), the Community College of the Air Force (CCAF), the Coast Guard Institute (CGI), the Joint Services Transcript (JST), PHS, or NOAA. 
CREDIT CONVERSION 
Institutions in the US typically report earned credits in terms of semesters or quarters. These are sometimes called “hours” as in semester hours or quarter hours. Salem uses semester credits based on Carnegie Units. 
 
Carnegie Units are based on instructional time: 
•	15 hours of Lecture = 1 credit 
•	30 hours of Lab = 1 credit 
•	45 hours of Fieldwork, Practica, or Clinical learning experience = 1 credit 
 
Per Federal guidelines, each hour of lecture is to be accompanied by 2 hours of preparation and homework. Thus a 3-credit course delivered in 4 weeks is roughly equivalent to a full-time job. 
 
The conversion of quarter credits to semester credits is calculated by multiplying the quarter credits by 2/3 and rounding to a whole number. Thus a 3 quarter-credit course = 3*2/3 = 2 semester-credits. 

European Credit Transfer and Accumulation: Students coming to Salem from European Union nations that have adopted the European Credit Transfer and Accumulation (ECTS) the divisor is The ECTS approach is defined in terms of student hours, not instructional hours. A “first cycle” or “bachelor’s” degree requires completion of 180 ECTS credits if the student completed high school in the EU, as per the Bologna Process. Thus, the student would take the equivalent of 180 / 2 = 90 semester credits in the US. A “second cycle” or “master’s” degree requires a minimum of 60 ECTS credits: 60 /2 = 30 semester credits. It is not unusual in the EU for master’s degrees to require 90 to 120 ECTS credits, which is equivalent to 45 to 60 semester credits. 
 
For students presenting non-ECTS international credits for transfer, the translation of hours is not straightforward. The independent assessment of earned credits is described in the International Admissions section (above). 
EVALUATION OF INTERNATIONAL TRANSFER CREDITS 
Students seeking transfer credits from post-secondary institutions outside of the United States must follow the International Admissions procedures. 
MAXIMUM TRANSFER CREDITS 
In conformity with the Higher Learning Commission’s Assumed Practices: 
•	Undergraduate students must complete at least 25% of the credits for their undergraduate degree program at Salem. This requirement means 15 of 60 credits for the associate’s or 30 of 120 credits for a bachelor’s degree. 
•	Graduate students must complete at least 50% of the credits for their program at Salem. This means 15 of 30 or 18 of 36 credits. 
The maximum credits for university-approved Prior Learning Assessment (PLA) is 25% of the total credits for the program or certificate. 
•	Undergraduate students may earn 15 PLA credits toward an associate degree or 30 credits toward a bachelor’s degree. 
•	Graduate students may earn a maximum of 6 PLA credits toward a 30-credit program or 9 toward a 36-credit program. 
Students must have passed with a “C” or better all undergraduate courses submitted for consideration toward an undergraduate degree. Students must have earned at least a “C” in all graduate courses submitted for consideration toward a graduate degree or certificate. Students must have earned at least a “B” in all advanced undergraduate courses submitted for consideration toward a graduate degree or certificate, to a maximum of 15 credits or 50% of the required credits, whichever is less. Salem will not award transfer credit for failed academic courses. 
 
Individual academic programs may set additional limits on transfer credits as approved by the University. 

PRIOR LEARNING ASSESSMENT (PLA) 
Transfer credit may be awarded via PLA. For current and prior Service members, Salem will evaluate the learning experiences documented in the Service member’s official Service transcripts and, if appropriate to the degree program, award academic or PLA credits. Official transcripts must be provided. 
 
PLA is available for speakers of foreign languages. CLEP is recommended for academic transfer credit for Spanish, German, and French per ACE recommendations (clep.collegeboard.org/world- languages). In addition, Salem will evaluate students’ requests for PLA of foreign language fluency for PLA credit. 
Experiential learning must be documented with a portfolio prepared by the student to demonstrate the achievement of relevant learning outcomes. A portfolio usually includes a comprehensive chronological résumé, artifacts that substantiate claims (e.g., a report or exhibit that demonstrates knowledge), copies of certificates that earned continuing education units (CEU), relevant job descriptions, nonproprietary performance reviews, and so forth. The portfolio must be submitted electronically and must provide appropriate, corroborated evidence of the claimed learning. Impartial, objective references who can attest to the experiential learning without conflict of interest must be provided to substantiate claims. Experiential learning will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis.  
RESIDENTIAL REQUIREMENTS 
Undergraduate degree programs in Biology, Education, and Nursing have significant lab and fieldwork or practica that require students to reside within convenient commuting distance of the campus. Undergraduate programs in Business Administration, Computer Science, Criminal Justice, Information Technology, and Nursing RN-BSN may be completed entirely by distance education. The MBA, M.Ed., MSCJ, MSIT, MSN, and DBA may be completed by distance education. 
TRANSFERABILITY OF CREDITS 
The transferability of credits earned at Salem University to another institution is at the discretion of the accepting institution. It is the student’s responsibility to confirm whether credits will be accepted by another institution of the student’s choice. 
EXPECTATIONS OF DISTANCE EDUCATION LEARNERS 
Salem offers classroom, distance education (primarily online via the Internet), and blended courses that have classroom and distance education components. Distance education students are responsible for ensuring they have the resources to complete courses successfully. 
SCHEDULING DISTANCE AND BLENDED COURSES 
The Registrar schedules students into distance and blended sections of courses as needed. Students can request a distance or blended course section depending on availability. Distance and blended courses are regular courses with specific start and end dates just like classroom courses. These courses are not self-paced: Students must fulfill the requirements stated in the syllabi by the deadlines set by the faculty. 

ACCESS TO COURSE MATERIALS 
 Salem University delivers courses through the Blackboard® Learn learning management system, which can be accessed at https://salemu.blackboard.com. To participate in courses, students are required to have reliable access to the Internet and the following technology resources:
•	A computer with a current version of Microsoft® Windows, macOS, or a comparable operating system
•	A modern web browser such as Firefox, Chrome, or equivalent
•	A personal productivity suite that includes word processing, spreadsheet, and presentation software with functionality comparable to Microsoft Office, and the ability to save files in Microsoft Office-compatible or Rich Text Format (RTF)
•	Adobe Acrobat Reader for viewing PDF documents
The majority of Salem University courses utilize electronic textbooks (eBooks), some of which may require specialized reader software provided by the publisher.
For students attending classes or accessing resources on the West Virginia campus, wireless Internet connectivity is available. The university operates high-capacity local servers with multiple-core processors, protected by commercial-grade firewalls to ensure security. Email and additional shared services are hosted in the cloud to provide reliable and secure access.

EMAIL COMMUNICATIONS 
Salem email accounts (username@students.salemu.edu) are the primary means of email communication between students, their faculty, and the university. Each student is provided a Salem email account. Students are responsible for checking their Salem email regularly. Within courses, the Blackboard Messages feature is used, which provides an archived copy of the correspondence. 
ESTABLISHING ONLINE ATTENDANCE 
Students are required to establish their attendance by completing the first academic assignment. Logging into Blackboard by itself is not sufficient to establish attendance.   
Policy Statement
 	This policy applies to all Salem University students, including both on-campus and online learners. As professionals, students are responsible for managing their learning experiences and maximizing educational opportunities, an essential mark of professionalism. All students are required to establish attendance by completing the "Before Class Begins" module within Blackboard on the first day (Week 1) of each course. Failure to establish attendance within the first week may result in administrative withdrawal from the course.  The attendance policy applies without exception, including the enrichment courses offered at Salem University.
Active participation is essential for success in both online and on-campus courses. A lack of participation may negatively impact grades, as engagement is a critical component of learning. Students should complete all assigned course activities, including enrichment assignments, to demonstrate ongoing engagement. Participation in all required activities is required for assessing student learning and engagement throughout the course.
Students are expected to access their courses daily and actively engage in the learning environment to achieve mastery of course content. Completing weekly assignments is crucial for acquiring new knowledge and mastering learning objectives. Adequate preparation is vital to fully benefit from each session and course. 
Attendance Requirements:
•	All students must establish attendance by completing the “Before Class Begins” module within Blackboard by Day Two (Tuesday) of week 1 for each course.
•	 Failure to establish attendance during the first week of class may result in administrative withdrawal from the course.
Procedure for Attendance Confirmation:
1.	Log into the Blackboard course.
2.	Navigate to the "Before Class Begins" section.
3.	Complete the entire module, including completing the syllabus quiz and participating in Discussion 1 within the module.

Participation Expectations:
•	Active participation is essential to both online and on-campus courses and is a key factor in determining academic success. Lack of participation may negatively impact grades.
•	Completion of all assigned course activities and assignments is required to evaluate engagement throughout the course.
•	Participation in all assigned activities is required for assessing student learning and engagement.
By adhering to these guidelines, students contribute to a meaningful and professional educational experience that supports academic success and engagement.
This policy applies to all Salem University students, including both on-campus and online learners. As professionals, students are responsible for their own learning experiences and for making the most of all educational opportunities—an essential mark of professionalism. All students must establish attendance through Blackboard course, “Before Class Begins” module on Day 1 of each course.  Failure to establish attendance according to the guidelines in the Blackboard the university’s learning management system during the first week of class may result in the student being dropped from the course.

 Student participation is an important part of online and on-campus courses; the lack thereof can result in a poor grade. All assigned course activities must be completed and required, your participation confirms attendance in the course. All course activities and courses assignments, should be completed to assist in determining student engagement throughout the course.  This policy also applies to the enrichment courses.

Students are expected to access their courses daily. Students are also expected to engage in the learning environment in a manner that will permit mastery of course content. Completing the assignments each week facilitates the acquisition of new knowledge and mastery of the course content. Adequate preparation is essential to gain the most from each course. Adequate preparation is essential to gain the most from the sessions. If at any time a student is having difficulty with the course content or feels a need for more individualized attention, it is expected that the student will contact the course instructor to make an appointment for an individual conference. Students can also seek assistance from Tutor.com and the writing center. Students are responsible for notifying the instructor and their advisor if a situation requires an extended absence.

RESEARCH INVOLVING HUMAN SUBJECTS 
All academic courses and internships involving research will be carried forward in an ethical manner, and special attention will be given to research that involves human subjects. Human subjects may include human beings, human materials, or the use of recombinant DNA molecules. 
 
The Institutional Review Board (IRB) must clear all research involving human subjects. The IRB will review all research proposals involving human subjects. The purpose of the IRB is to protect the rights and welfare of individuals who serve as subjects of research and to ensure institutional compliance with those ethical considerations contained in the Code of Federal Regulations (45 CFR 46). 
 
The researcher must submit an application and summary of the research proposal in advance to the appropriate entity for approval. No research or modification of approved research may be conducted without the review and consent of the IRB. 
“Research” is operationally defined as the systematic investigation of an institutionally approved topic that may include the development, testing, piloting, implementing, and evaluating data collection instruments or protocols with the goal of developing generalizable knowledge or otherwise contributing to the academic discipline’s body of knowledge. "Systematic investigation" may range from a designed experiment in a lab with independent and dependent variables to an ethnographic study. Research methods are to be approved prior to being implemented by the researcher. "Instruments or protocols" are broadly defined to include any means employed to gather data from research participants. This includes without limitation surveys, interview questions, and focus group questioning routes. "Generalizable knowledge" is the essential goal of research. Such research typically is undertaken as part of a project to develop an academic thesis, dissertation, publication, or presentation. Only those activities that qualify as research within the scope of these operational definitions require IRB approval. 
OFFICIAL TRANSCRIPTS 
To request an official Salem transcript, the student must furnish their last date of attendance and student number. The student must submit the full name under which they were enrolled and their date of birth. Requests for transcripts must be made online or by writing to the Registrar. Salem cannot accept telephone requests because of the inherent security risk. 
GRIEVANCE AND COMPLAINT PROCEDURES 
Students have the right to file a grievance (i.e., a formal complaint). If a student’s grievance relates to appeal of a final grade, the University policy for Final Grade Appeals applies. For other matters that the student wishes to have addressed formally by the university, the following steps are to be followed. 
GRIEVANCES AND COMPLAINTS RELATED TO SPECIFIC COURSES 
1)	The student will contact their current faculty of record listed in the syllabus, either in person or via email, stating the concern as clearly, specifically, and briefly as possible. 
2)	The faculty will reply by email within 2 business days with a decision to resolve the matter. 
3)	If the student wishes to appeal the faculty’s decision, they may submit an appeal to the dean of the school or director of the program by email, which must be completed within 5 business days. 
4)	The dean/director will reply by email within 2 business days with a decision with respect to the appeal. 
5)	If the student wishes to appeal the dean’s or director’s decision, they may appeal to the Provost by email, which must be completed within 5 business days. 
6)	The Provost will reply by email within 2 business days with a decision with respect to the appeal. 
7)	If the student wishes to appeal the Provost’s decision, they may appeal to the President by email, which must be completed within 5 business days. The President will reply by email within 2 business days with a final decision with respect to the appeal. The President’s decision is final. 

OTHER GRIEVANCES AND COMPLAINTS 
If a student is dissatisfied with any aspect of his or her interaction with Salem representatives, services, policies, or procedures, then he or she may submit a formal complaint or grievance. Such complaints are not limited to academics. The general procedure is as follows: 
 
1)	The student will access the Student Grievance form via the student portal under Forms and complete the form as completely as possible.
2)	A university official will reply by email within two (2) business days with a decision to resolve the matter. 
3)	If the student wishes to appeal the decision, he or she may appeal to complaints@salemu.edu by email, which must be completed within five (5) business days. 
4)	The President will reply by email within two (2) business days with a final decision with respect to the appeal. The President’s decision is final.

EXCEPTION PROCESSING 

If the grievance or complaint involves any person listed above, then the student shall begin with the next higher person listed. For example, if the matter relates directly to the student’s interaction with the dean or director, then the student will begin the process with a statement to the Provost, either in person or by email. 
COMPLAINT RESOLUTION FOR DISTANCE EDUCATION COURSES 
Student complaints regarding Final Grades are handled as specified in Final Grade Appeals. Other complaints are handled as specified in Grievance and Complaint Procedures. 
Salem operates in conformance with the National Council for State Authorization Reciprocity Agreement (SARA) guidelines. Unresolved complaints resulting from distance education courses may be forwarded to the West Virginia Higher Education Policy Commission (WVHEPC), which is West Virginia’s SARA “portal entity.” WVHEPC will investigate and resolve allegations of dishonest or fraudulent activity, including the provision of false or misleading information. The SARA process for resolving complaints is as follows: 
a.	Complaints against an institution operating under SARA go first through the institution’s own procedures for resolution of grievances. 
b.	Complaints regarding student grades or student conduct violations are governed entirely by institutional policy and the laws of the SARA institution’s home state. 
c.	If a person bringing a complaint is not satisfied with the outcome of the institutional process for handling complaints, the complaint (except for complaints about grades or student conduct violations) may be appealed, within two years of the incident about which the complaint is made, to the SARA portal entity in the home state of the institution against which the complaint has been lodged. That entity shall notify the SARA portal entity of the state in which the student is located of receipt of that appealed complaint. The resolution of the complaint by the institution’s home state SARA portal entity, through its SARA complaint resolution process, will be final, except for complaints that fall under the provisions of (g), below. 
d.	While the final resolution of the complaint rests with the SARA portal entity in the home state of the institution against which the complaint has been lodged, the portal entity in the complainant’s location state may assist as needed. The final disposition of a complaint resolved by the Home State shall be communicated to the portal entity in the state where the student lived at the time of the incident leading to the complaint, if known to the institution’s Home State. 
e.	While final resolution of complaints (for purposes of adjudication of the complaint and enforcement of any resultant remedies or redress) resides in certain cases with institutions (complaints about grades or student conduct violations), or more generally with the relevant institution’s home state SARA portal entity (all other complaints), the regional compact(s) administering SARA may consider a disputed complaint as a “case file” if concerns are raised against a participating state with regard to whether that state is abiding by SARA Policies and Standards. The regional compact may review such complaints in determining whether a state under its purview is abiding by the SARA standards. Similarly, a complaint “case file” may be reviewed by NC-SARA in considering whether a regional compact is ensuring that its member states are abiding by the SARA standards required for their participation in the agreement. 
f.	SARA portal entities shall report quarterly to NC-SARA the number and disposition of complaints that are not resolved at the institutional level. Such data will create transparency and can be used in determining whether a regional compact is ensuring that its SARA member states, and those states’ institutions are abiding by the standards required for participation in the agreement. 
g.	Nothing in SARA Policies and Standards precludes a state from using its laws of general application to pursue action against an institution that violates those laws. 
FINAL GRADE APPEALS 
Faculty members assign grades based on the work students submit in fulfillment of the requirements stated in the syllabi. Students have the right to as for r econsideration regarding their final grades in courses if they believe their grades reflect a capricious, arbitrary, or prejudiced academic evaluation, or reflect discrimination based on race, sex, age, handicap, veteran status, religion or creed, sexual orientation, color, or national origin. The posted grade shall remain in effect until the grade change procedure is completed. The following procedure will be used. 
 
Step 1. The student shall ask for a change of the final grade directly to their faculty within five (5) days after the grade is posted. The reason for the grade change must be explained in detail. If the student is not satisfied with the faculty’s decision, they should proceed immediately to Step 2. 
Step 2. The student shall contact the responsible dean, department head, or program leader to request the final grade be changed. This request must be submitted in writing, preferably via email. The responsible dean, department head, or program leader will render a decision within five (5) days. If the student remains unsatisfied with this decision, they should proceed to Step 3. 
Step 3. The student may request that the Provost assemble an Academic Appeal Committee to make a final resolution. This Committee shall consist of three (3) or more faculty members including at least one outside the original faculty’s discipline. The Committee will advise the student of the formal resolution and render a decision within five (5) days. The decision of the Committee is final. 

This procedure is to be completed within 15 calendar days. If a grade change is approved, the University will ensure the change is recorded in the student’s official academic record. 
 
POINT OF CONTACT FOR SERVICE MEMBERS 
The Registrar serves as the primary point of contact for Service members seeking information about available, appropriate academic counseling, financial aid counseling, and student support services. The Registrar will direct students to other Salem offices with specialized knowledge as may be necessary. 
MILITARY PERSONNEL LEAVE OF ABSENCE 
Students in the U.S. Armed Forces may request a Military Leave of Absence of up to 90 days. Documentation is required and missed coursework must be completed. Leave may be requested in writing based on military duties, including, but not limited to, unanticipated deployments or mobilization, activation, and temporary duty assignments. Salem will advise the student of potential effects on financial aid and academic standing. 
SERVICES FOR STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES 
In conformance with the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA), Salem seeks to work collaboratively with students who identify themselves as having a disability as per the ADA and who are seeking academic adjustment or other accommodation. The university will seek to achieve mutual agreement on such requests to provide reasonable accommodation for disabilities that may negatively affect students’ college education. 
 
It is the responsibility of the student to contact the Dean of Student Affairs to supply written evidence prepared by a licensed professional with appropriate training and experience relevant to the disabling condition and who has no relationship to the student. The student will be provided with a checklist of required evidence for the student to submit. The Coordinator of Disability Services will determine the reasonable accommodation that can be offered and will document the same with a Determination Letter that will be mailed to the student. If the student disagrees with the determination, they may initiate the standard complaint procedure. 
It is the student’s responsibility to provide a copy of the Determination Letter to each of their faculty during the first week of a new class or prior to any assessments listed in the syllabus. If a faculty member does not receive a copy of the Determination Letter timely, they are not required to provide the academic adjustment or other accommodation.  
COPYRIGHT 
Salem strictly prohibits the unauthorized downloading, duplication, or sharing of copyrighted materials. The Copyright Act of 1976 grants copyright owners the exclusive right to reproduce their works and distribute copies of their work. Works that receive copyright protection include published works such as textbooks. Copying a textbook without permission from the owner of the copyright may constitute copyright infringement. Civil and criminal penalties may be assessed for copyright infringement. Civil penalties include damages up to 
$150,000 per infringement; criminal penalties include a fine up to $250,000 per infringement and imprisonment. 

ANTI-CIRCUMVENTION PROVISIONS OF THE DIGITAL MILLENNIUM COPYRIGHT ACT 
Under the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA), criminal penalties if a person tries to circumvent a copyright control, such as digital rights management (DRM) technology or encryption. Under 17 U.S.C. § 1204(a), a person can be held criminally liable if they circumvent access controls willfully for the purpose of commercial advantage or private financial gain. The government may consider various factors in deciding whether to pursue criminal copyright infringement or not. 
FINANCIAL AID POLICIES AND PROCEDURES   TUITION AND FEES 
Tuition and fees and other charges are published in the Catalog Bulletin, which may be obtained from the Office of Admissions or downloaded from https://www.salemu.edu/wp-content/uploads/2024/04/2023-2024-Academic-Catalog-Updated_03292024-FINAL.pdf. The Catalog Bulletin is an integral part of this catalog and is hereby incorporated by reference in its entirety. 
 
*The Business, Biology, and Nursing programs have separate fees. Please see the latest catalog bulletin for current fees (https://www.salemu.edu/wp-content/uploads/2024/07/Salem-U-Catalog-Bulletin-2024-2025-Effective-Date-July-29-2024.pdf). 
ROOM AND BOARD RATE 
Current room and board charges are contained in the Catalog Bulletin. Board charges cover 19 meals per week while classes are in session. No allowance is made for students who miss meals or who choose not to participate. The board plan does not provide meals when the campus is closed (e.g., holidays and breaks between semesters). Room and board isare offered only on campus in West Virginia. 
TERMS OF PAYMENT 
Students are required to pay 100 percent of their estimated amount due for the semester at least two weeks prior to the first scheduled day of class. Payment may be made in cash, by check, or by VISA, MasterCard, or Discover Card. Questions regarding payment should be directed to the Bursar. (See Telephone Directory (above) for the number.) 
 
Any student who is delinquent financially will not be permitted to register, audit, attend classes, or graduate until all charges are paid. Salem reserves the right not to release transcripts, grades, or other records for any student who has an outstanding account balance, is delinquent, or is in default. 
 
If a student with an outstanding balance on their account were to separate from the institution through withdrawal or suspension, that student remains responsible for the account balance in full. If the account remains unpaid, then it will be sent to collections, and the student will be responsible for any collection fees incurred and payable to any outside collection agency.   

FEDERAL FINANCIAL AID 
Salem University provides Federal Financial Aid to qualified and eligible students. For a student to be eligible for Federal Financial Aid, the student must be a United States Citizen or qualifying permanent resident, file a Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA) form, and be eligible to receive U.S. federal dollars. Some students may be selected for additional verification to establish their eligibility. 
FINANCIAL AID AND SATISFACTORY ACADEMIC STANDING AND PROGRESS 
A student may qualify for continuing federal financial aid if they are in good academic standing, is not on academic probation, and meets all other eligibility requirements for federal financial aid.   
 
PERIODS OF NON-ENROLLMENT 
Periods of non-enrollment include Leave of Absence (LOA) and Standard Period of Non- Enrollment (SPNE). 
 
Leave of Absence: Students may submit requests for LOA to a maximum 180 calendar days in aggregate per award year consistent with federal regulations. Each request for LOA must be made in writing, signed by the student, and approved by the university. Financial aid is not available during a LOA. 
 
Standard Period of Non-Enrollment: A student who attends classes for two consecutive full- time semesters but does not enroll in any courses during the third consecutive semester will be defined as being in SPNE status for the third semester. 
 
Effect of Non-Return: If the student on LOA does not return by the agreed upon date, the university will process the student as a withdrawal without notice with an effective date of the Last Date of Attendance prior to the LOA. Similarly, if the students on SPNE does not return at the commencement of the next semester, the university will process the student as a withdrawal without notice with an effective date of the Last Date of Attendance prior to the SPNE.  
REFUND POLICIES 
Salem University’s Institutional Refund Policy as outlined below applies to all domestic students who completely withdraw from all classes during a semester. (See statement below in regard to international students.) The Return of Title IV Refund Policy applies to students if they received or were scheduled to receive federal student aid program funds. The requirements of the federal Return of Title IV Refund policy are separate from the institutional refund policies and any applicable state refund policy. Therefore, a student may owe a balance to the University for Institutional Charges after the application of the Return to Title IV calculation. The state refund policy applies only to residents of the state of Indiana who are enrolled at Salem University.  
RETURN OF FEDERAL TITLE IV AID 
Federal regulations require Salem University to calculate a return of Title IV funds for any student who withdraws or does not complete a semester and who has received or was scheduled to receive financial assistance from the Title IV programs. 
The calculation is performed using a specific formula required by the U.S. Department of Education. 
 
The term Title IV Funds refers to Federal Financial Aid Programs authorized under the Higher Education Act of 1965, as amended and includes Federal Pell Grants, Federal Supplemental Educational Opportunity Grants, Iraq and Afghanistan Service Grants, Federal Perkins Loans, Federal Direct Stafford Loans, and Federal PLUS loans. 
CALCULATION OF EARNED TITLE IV ASSISTANCE 
The formula is a pro-rata formula and the calculation for return of Title IV funds is based on the official withdrawal date (Last Date of Attendance or LDA) as determined by the Registrar’s Office. The number of days completed in the semester is divided by the total number of days in the semester to determine the percentage of semester completed. This is the percentage of federal student aid earned by the student. 
 
If the percentage is 60% or more of the semester completed, there is no return of Title IV funds due and the student has earned 100% of scheduled Title IV funds. If the percentage is less than 60%, this percentage is multiplied by the total amount of Title IV aid scheduled to determine total amount of Title IV aid earned. 
POST-WITHDRAWAL DISBURSEMENT 
If the total amount of the Title IV grants and/or loan assistance earned as of the withdrawal date is more than the amount that was disbursed to the student, the difference between the two amounts will be treated as a post-withdrawal disbursement. If there are outstanding charges on the student's account, the University will credit the student's account for all or part of the amount of the post-withdrawal disbursement of grant assistance (not loan), up to the amount of the allowable charges. 
 
Any amount of a post-withdrawal disbursement that is not credited to a student's account will be offered to the student within 30 days of the date that the institution determined that the student withdrew. Upon receipt of a timely response from the student, the University will disburse the funds within 90 days of the date of determination of the student's withdrawal date. 
 
Salem University maintains the right to decide whether to make a post-withdrawal disbursement in the event that the student responds after 14 days of the date that the notification was sent. If the University decides not to make this post-withdrawal disbursement, it will inform the student in writing. 
RETURN OF UNEARNED TITLE IV FUNDS 
If the total amount of Title IV grant and/or loan assistance that was earned as of the withdrawal date (LDA) is less than the amount that was disbursed to the student, the difference between the two amounts will be returned to the Title IV program(s) and no further disbursements will be made. 

BY THE UNIVERSITY 
If a student has received excess funds, the University must return within 45 days from the date of determination of withdrawal a portion of the excess equal to the lesser of: 
•	The student's institutional charges multiplied by the unearned percentage of funds, or 
•	The entire amount of the excess funds. 
•	The funds will be returned in the order below as prescribed by federal regulations, within 45 days from the date of determination that a student withdrew: 
	■ 	Unsubsidized Direct Stafford Loans 
	■ 	Subsidized Direct Stafford Loans 
	■ 	Direct PLUS loans 
	■ 	Federal Pell Grants 
	■ 	Federal Supplemental Educational Opportunity Grants (FSEOG) 
BY THE STUDENT 
If there is remaining unearned aid, the student is responsible for returning those funds. If the aid to be returned is in the form of a loan that has been released to the student (or parent if a PLUS loan) borrower, the student (or parent) can repay the loan in accordance with the terms of the promissory note over a period of time. If the aid to be returned is in the form of grant funds, the law provides that the student may repay 50% of a federal grant rather than 100%. The University will return the student's grant obligation to the appropriate federal program. Students may obtain copies of their refund calculations from the Financial Aid Office.  
INSTITUTIONAL REFUND POLICY 
In accordance with University policy, if a student is not accepted, all advanced money shall be refunded. If a student is accepted and then cancels registration before classes begin, all tuition paid in advance shall be refunded. Any student who begins classes on or after the start date of any semester and then completely withdraws prior to the end of any semester, the University will earn tuition and fees based on the week in which the student withdraws, and the student will be obligated on the following basis. If the last date of attendance is during the: 
 
•	First, second, or third calendar week of the semester, then an obligation of 25% of the semester’s tuition and fees. 
•	Fourth calendar week of the semester, then an obligation of 50% of the semester’s tuition and fees. 
•	Calendar week beyond the fourth calendar week of the semester, then an obligation of 100% of the semester’s tuition and fees. 
 
Salem University determines the official date of a student’s withdrawal based on the student’s last date of attendance (LDA). The LDA is used to determine the amount of the refund that is due to the student. The institution’s refund procedure requires the Registrar to report official and unofficial withdrawals to the Financial Aid and the Bursar’s Offices. The Financial Aid Office is responsible for the review of student data and completion of the refund and repayment calculations as appropriate to institutional policy. The Student Accounts Office issues all refunds inclusive of refunds due to a student’s withdrawal from the University. The payments of refunds due to withdrawal are processed within 45 days from the date of determination of withdrawal. 
The Financial Aid Office will contact student loan borrowers who withdraw from the University and provide information and advice regarding loan repayment. 
 
The University will first calculate the amount of unearned Title IV assistance that must be returned to the federal student aid programs under the Federal Return of Title IV Aid policy. The unearned amount of Title IV funds will then be subtracted from the total amount of all funds that was paid for institutional charges the semester of withdrawal to compute the Adjusted Amount Paid. The University will then calculate the amount of institutional charges (tuition and fees, etc.) that will be retained based on the requirements of any applicable state law or the applicable University’s institutional refund policies. The amount of institutional charges that can be retained will be subtracted from the Adjusted Amount Paid. If a credit balance from Title IV funds remains on the student’s account, the refund will be made to the student or, with the student’s written authorization, to federal student aid programs in the order specified above in Federal Return of Title IV policy. If there is a non-Title IV credit balance, the credit balance will be returned to the source of funding per agency policy and or to the student as permitted. The student will be billed for any outstanding charges. 
REFUND POLICY FOR INTERNATIONAL STUDENTS 
International applicants who are granted a visa to attend Salem must commit to an enrollment of at least two academic semesters (representing eight months of continuous enrollment) in order to be admitted to Salem and to be eligible for an international student scholarship. If an international student withdraws or transfers prior to the completion of the minimum two semesters, the tuition, fees, room, and board charges are non-refundable. After completion of the first two academic semesters, if an international student withdraws from the program during a semester the tuition, fees, room, and board charges are non-refundable. 
REFUND POLICY FOR INDIANA RESIDENTS 
The following refund policy applies to INDIANA residents attending Salem: 
1)	A student is entitled to a full refund if one (1) or more of the following criteria are met: 
a.	The student cancels the enrollment agreement or enrollment application within six (6) business days after signing. 
b.	The student does not meet the school’s minimum admission requirements. 
c.	The student’s enrollment was procured as a result of a misrepresentation in the written materials utilized by the school. 
d.	If the student has not visited the school prior to enrollment and, upon touring the school or attending the regularly scheduled orientation/classes, the student withdrew from the program within three (3) days. 
2)	A student withdrawing from an instructional program, after starting the instructional program at the school and attending one (1) week or less, is entitled to a refund of ninety percent (90%) of the cost of the financial obligation, less an administrative fee of ten percent (10%) of the total tuition, not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100). 
3)	A student withdrawing from an instructional program, after attending more than one (1) week but equal to or less than twenty-five percent (25%) of the duration of the instructional program, is entitled to a refund of seventy-five percent (75%) of the cost of the financial obligation, less an administrative fee of ten percent (10%) of the total tuition, not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100). 
4)	A student withdrawing from an instructional program, after attending more than twenty- five percent (25%) but equal to or less than fifty percent (50%) of the duration of the instructional program, is entitled to a refund of fifty percent (50%) of the cost of the financial obligation, less an administrative fee of ten percent (10%) of the total tuition, not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100). 
5)	A student withdrawing from an instructional program, after attending more than fifty percent (50%) but equal to or less than sixty percent (60%) of the duration of the instructional program, is entitled to a refund of forty percent (40%) of the cost of the financial obligation, less an administrative fee of ten percent (10%) of the total tuition, not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100). 
6)	A student withdrawing from an institutional program, after attending more than sixty percent (60%) of the duration of the instructional program, is not entitled to a refund. 
REFUND POLICY FOR INDIANA DISTANCE EDUCATION STUDENTS 
The institution shall cancel an Indiana student's distance education program enrollment upon request of the student. The student's obligation at the time of cancellation will be calculated as follows: 
 
A)	Within six (6) days following the signing of the contract, no obligation and all monies paid, if any, to be fully refunded. 
B)	After six (6) days, but before beginning of training, a registration fee of 20% of the total tuition not to exceed $100.00. 
C)	After beginning of training, the registration fee, plus 10% of the total tuition until student completes 10% of the assignment. 
D)	After completing 10% of the assignments, but prior to completing 25% of the assignments, the registration fee plus 25% of the total tuition. 
E)	After completing 25% of the assignments but prior to completing 50% of the assignments, the registration fee plus 50% of the total tuition. 
F)	After completing 50% of assignments, but prior to completing 75% of the assignments, the registration fee plus 75% of total tuition. 
G)	After completing 75% of assignments, the student is responsible for total tuition. 
H)	The contract shall state a length of time for a student to complete his course of study. If a student does not cancel by the end of such time, he is responsible for his total tuition. 
I)	The institution will make a proper refund, within thirty-one (31) days of the student's request for cancellation. 
J)	If the student has paid tuition extending beyond twelve (12) months all such charges shall be refunded.  

SATISFACTORY ACADEMIC PROGRESS  
 Satisfactory Academic Progress (SAP) defines a student’s eligibility for enrollment using Federal financial aid. Salem University is required by federal and state regulations as well as institutional policy to determine if a student is achieving SAP. The following sections describe the components of Federal SAP that apply to all students using Federal financial aid. 

REQUIREMENTS OF THE SAP POLICY 
The following components are measured to determine whether a student is meeting Federal SAP standards: Qualitative, Quantitative, and Maximum Timeframe. 
MINIMUM CUMULATIVE GRADE POINT AVERAGE 
The minimum cumulative GPA (CGPA) required for good standing varies according to the student’s class level and program of study. Class level is based on the number of credit- hours earned. CGPA is calculated each semester.  
 
TOTAL CREDIT HOURS EARNED 
Class Level 	(Including accepted transfer credits 	 
Freshmen 	0-30 	1.6 
Sophomore 	31-60 	1.8 
Junior 	61-90 	2.0 
Senior 	90 or more 	2.0 
Master’s 	0-36 	3.0 
Doctorate 	0-51 	3.0 
 
* The Bachelor of Science in Education, ASDN Program, and RN-BSN Program have higher CGPA requirements. See the relevant program handbook for additional details. 
Note: The CGPA is based on the courses attempted to fulfill the degree’s requirements. Courses with official grades of W, WF, and WP are not used to fulfill degree requirements and are not included in the CGPA. In the case of a repeated course, the higher or highest grade is included in the calculation. 
MINIMUM PACE OR COMPLETION RATE 
Undergraduate students must successfully complete at least 50% of the first 12 credits attempted and 60% of the first 24 credits attempted; thereafter, they must maintain at least 67% successful completion rate. Graduate students must maintain at least 67% successful completion rate throughout their programs. Minimum Pace is assessed at the end of each semester. 
MAXIMUM TIMEFRAME 
A student may attempt no more than 150% of the credit hours required by their degree program using federal financial aid. A student is ineligible for federal financial aid when it becomes mathematically impossible for the student to complete the program within 150% of the length of the program. 

FAILURE TO MEET SAP REQUIREMENTS 
An undergraduate student who does not meet SAP requirements will be placed on Financial Aid Warning which allows the student to receive federal financial aid for one additional semester. The student will be monitored for SAP again at the end of the Financial Aid Warning semester. 
 
A student who fails to meet SAP requirements after a Financial Aid Warning semester will be placed on Financial Aid Suspension and is not eligible to receive additional federal financial aid without a successful appeal. 
A student who wishes to appeal must submit the appeal in writing to the Office of Student Financial Aid. Federal financial aid will only be awarded if an appeal is approved. This appeal process is available for a student who experiences a personal injury or illness, death of a relative, or other circumstances beyond the student’s control that affects the student’s ability to meet SAP. Appeals may be approved outright or may be approved with an Academic Plan. In either case, should the appeal be approved, students will be allowed to receive federal financial aid for a Probationary Semester. 
 
A student who is placed on an Academic Plan will be reviewed for SAP at the end of the Probationary Semester. If the student still does not meet SAP requirements as stated in the Academic Plan, the student will be placed on Financial Aid Suspension and will be ineligible for federal financial aid until such time as the student meets SAP requirements. Students may appeal Financial Aid Suspension. 
 
At the completion of the Probationary Semester, the student whose appeal was approved without an academic plan will be reviewed for SAP. If the student still does not meet SAP requirements, the student will be placed on Financial Aid Suspension and will be ineligible for federal financial aid until such time as the student meets SAP requirements. The student may appeal Financial Aid Suspension. 
 
If the student’s appeal is denied, the student will be ineligible for federal financial aid until the student meets the SAP requirements. 
REGAINING ELIGIBILITY FOR FINANCIAL AID 
A student who failed to meet SAP standards and who is approved to continue in their studies without benefit of federal financial aid (i.e., pays cash or makes other financial arrangements) may request a review of their academic record after any semester in which they are enrolled without receipt of federal financial aid. If the three SAP standards (above) are met at the time of evaluation, federal financial aid eligibility may be regained for the subsequent semester of enrollment in the academic year. 
SAP DEFINITIONS 
These SAP Definitions apply to students using federal financial aid. 
APPEAL 
An appeal is a process by which a student who is not meeting SAP standards, petitions the 
institution for reconsideration of their eligibility for enrollment and receipt of federal financial aid funds. An appeal must explain why the student failed to make satisfactory academic progress and what has changed in the student’s situation that will allow the student to make satisfactory progress by the time of the next scheduled evaluation. 
FINANCIAL AID WARNING 
Financial Aid Warning is a status assigned to a student who fails to make SAP at the end of a semester and is allowed to continue enrollment for one additional semester. A student is eligible to receive financial aid during a Financial Aid Warning semester. 

FINANCIAL AID PROBATION 
Financial Aid Probation is a status that is assigned to a student who fails to make SAP and who has successfully appealed and has had eligibility for financial aid reinstated. A student who is placed on Financial Aid Probation may receive financial aid for one subsequent payment period. A student on Financial Aid Probation may be required to meet certain terms and conditions. A student placed on Financial Aid Probation may be placed on an Academic Plan. At the conclusion of the Financial Aid Probation payment period, the student must either meet the SAP standards or fulfill the requirements specified in the Academic Plan, otherwise they will be placed on Financial Aid Suspension. 
ACADEMIC PLAN 
An Academic Plan is a written agreement between the student and the university that may extend the student's Financial Aid Probation period beyond one semester. The Academic Plan lists specific requirements (i.e., minimum course completion ratio and cumulative GPA) that the student must attain while on Financial Aid Probation in order to remain eligible for federal financial aid. SAP will be measured at the end of each semester while a student is on an Academic Plan. A student who fails to meet the requirements of the Academic Plan will be placed on Financial Aid Suspension. 
FINANCIAL AID SUSPENSION 
Financial Aid Suspension is a status that is assigned to a student who fails to make SAP, fails to regain eligibility by meeting the minimum SAP standards after a successful appeal and a Financial Aid Probation period or does not fulfill the requirements set forth in their Academic Plan during a Financial Aid Probation payment period. A student who is placed on Financial Aid Suspension may only receive federal financial aid by re-establishing eligibility by meeting the standards set forth in this SAP policy.  
EFFECT OF WITHDRAWALS, INCOMPLETES, REPETITIONS, TRANSFER CREDITS, CHANGE OF PROGRAM OR READMISSION, AND DEVELOPMENTAL COURSES WITHDRAWALS 
If the student withdraws from a course for any given semester  (e.g., student receives a grade of W for the course), the course credits are counted in the attempted credit hours. Withdrawn courses are calculated in the quantitative and maximum timeframe measures. 

INCOMPLETE GRADES 
A grade of incomplete is not an official final grade. An incomplete is counted in credit hours attempted for quantitative and maximum timeframe measures; however, it is not an official grade, it is not included in the calculation of academic grade point average, and it is not counted in total credit hours earned.
REPEATED COURSES 
Repetition of a course increases the number of credit-hours attempted and the number of credit- hours earned, if passed. If a student repeats a failed or previously passed course, the lower grade and corresponding grade points earned are excluded in the calculation of the GPA. The higher grade and corresponding grade points, from the original attempt or the repeat, is used in the GPA calculation. Each time a course is attempted, it is considered an attempt when calculating quantitative and maximum timeframe measures, regardless of whether the course is subsequently repeated for a better grade. The credits for all attempted courses are used when measuring the quantitative standard. A student may only be funded for a repeated course until they pass the course when the course was failed. For this purpose, passing is defined as any grade higher than an F, regardless of any school or program policy requiring a higher qualitative grade or measure to have been considered to pass the course. A student is permitted to retake a previously passed course once and receive funding for the repeated course. The repetition of a course negatively affects the student’s ability to satisfy quantitative and maximum timeframe standards. 
TRANSFER CREDITS 
All accepted transfer credits count both as attempted and as earned credit hours toward the quantitative and maximum timeframe measures for completion of program of study. In general, transfer credits may reduce the time to complete a degree program. 
CHANGE OF PROGRAM OR READMISSION 
If a student is readmitted to the University or changes their program of study, the credits and grades that are applicable to the student’s current program of study will be included in determining the student’s SAP and the appropriate evaluation of level of the student. Students are not permitted to change programs of study more than once unless they are meeting SAP requirements in their original program of study. 
DEVELOPMENTAL COURSES 
Developmental courses, including ESL, are calculated in the quantitative measure to determine pace or rate of completion but are not calculated in the maximum timeframe. The grades earned in ESL courses that earn college credit are included in the qualitative measure: cumulative GPA. 
WITHDRAWAL 
WITHDRAWAL FROM A COURSE 
4 Week Course 
 Students may drop a course without academic penalty by 11:59 PM Eastern Time on Wednesday of Week 1 of the course for 4 weeks.  Students who enroll late into 4-week courses have 3 days to submit a request to drop the course. 
 
8 Week and 16 Week Course 
Students may drop a course without academic penalty by 11:59 PM Eastern Time on Friday of Week 1 of the course for 8 and 16-week courses.  Students who enroll late into 8-week and 16-week courses have 5 days to submit a request to drop the course.  

All Courses 
Drops in Week 2 will incur additional fees and may have academic consequences. Any drop requests submitted after the deadlines must be accompanied by a written appeal to the Dean detailing the reasons why withdrawal from a class should be permitted. Only extenuating circumstances will be taken into consideration, as academic performance alone is not a valid reason for approval.  
 
Fee Proration 
Fees will be prorated based on the percentage of course completion at the time of dropping, as follows: 
 
4-Week Courses: 
- Drop by Wednesday of Week 1 (Or within 3 days on course enrollment): 75% refund 
- Drop by Friday of Week 2: 50% refund 
- No refunds after Week 2 
 
8-Week Courses: 
- Drop by Friday of Week 1 (Or within 5 days on course enrollment): 87.5% refund 
- Drop by the Friday of Week 2: 75% refund 
- No refunds after Week 2 
 
16-Week Courses: 
- Drop by Friday of Week 1 (Or within 5 days on course enrollment): 93.75% refund 
- Drop by the Friday of Week 2: 87.5% refund 
- No refunds after Week 2 
 
To drop a course, students must submit a formal request through the university's online student portal to the Registrar's Office before the specified deadline.  Courses dropped by Wednesday of Week 1 of the course for 4-week. Friday of Week 1 of the course for 8 and 16-week courses will not appear on the student's transcript. Courses dropped in Week 2 will be recorded as a "W" (Withdrawal) on the transcript. Students are responsible for any remaining balance on their account after the fee proration has been applied. Dropping a course may affect a student's financial aid eligibility. Students are strongly advised to consult with the Financial Aid Office before dropping a course. 

International students must maintain full-time enrollment status as required by their visa conditions. Dropping a course may impact their immigration status. 
 
This policy is subject to change. Students are responsible for reviewing and adhering to the most current version of the Add/Drop Policy as published on the Salem University website. 

Indiana Students ONLY 
Students residing in Indiana must adhere to the Indiana State policy only. 
 
REFUND POLICY FOR INDIANA STUDENTS 
  
The following refund policy applies to INDIANA students attending Salem: 
•	A student is entitled to a full refund if one (1) or more of the following criteria are met: 
o	The student cancels the enrollment agreement or enrollment application within six (6) business days after signing. 
o	The student does not meet the school’s minimum admission requirements. 
o	The student’s enrollment was procured as a result of a misrepresentation in the written materials utilized by the school. 
o	If the student has not visited the school prior to enrollment and, upon touring the school or attending the regularly scheduled orientation/classes, the student withdrew from the program within three (3) days. 
•	A student withdrawing from an instructional program after starting the instructional program at the school and attending one (1) week or less, is entitled to a refund of ninety percent (90%) of the cost of the financial obligation, less an administrative fee of ten percent (10%) of the total tuition, not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100). 
•	3. A student withdrawing from an instructional program after attending more than one week but equal to or less than twenty-five percent (25%) of the duration of the instructional program is entitled to a refund of seventy-five percent (75%) of the cost of the financial obligation, less an administrative fee of ten percent (10%) of the total tuition, not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100). 
•	A student withdrawing from an instructional program after attending more than twenty-five percent (25%) but equal to or less than fifty percent (50%) of the duration of the instructional program, is entitled to a refund of fifty percent (50%) of the cost of the financial obligation, less an administrative fee of ten percent (10%) of the total tuition, not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100). 
•	A student withdrawing from an instructional program after attending more than fifty percent (50%) but equal to or less than sixty percent (60%) of the duration of the instructional program is entitled to a refund of forty percent (40%) of the cost of the financial obligation, less an administrative fee of ten percent (10%) of the total tuition, not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100). 
•	A student withdrawing from an institutional program after attending more than sixty percent (60%) of the duration of the instructional program is not entitled to a refund. 

WITHDRAWAL FROM THE UNIVERSITY 
When a student is considering withdrawing from the University, the student should attempt to talk with their advisor or the Provost. The student must contact a Financial Aid Advisor and the Student Accounts Office to discuss the financial impact of withdrawal. International students must meet with a Student and Exchange Visitor Program (SEVP) Designated School Official (DSO or Principal DSO) before initiating the withdrawal process. 
WITHDRAWAL PROCESS 
The withdrawal process begins when the student notifies the Registrar of their intent to leave the institution. At that time the student should complete the University Withdrawal Form. The University Withdrawal Form requires signatures from various academic and administrative offices. A student must realize that notification of intent to withdraw from the institution will begin a series of events involving the recalculation of financial aid entitlement for the term and the future registration of the student in the institution. 
 
The withdrawal form must be processed through the Students Accounts Office where the student's eligibility for any refund of tuition and fees will be determined. If a student is receiving student aid, the Financial Aid Office will determine whether adjustments must be made to any federal, state, institutional, or other aid and arrange for the return of funds, if required. 
DETERMINATION OF WITHDRAWAL DATE 
Notification Given: When a student discusses withdrawal or brings the withdrawal form to the Registrar, the Registrar will note that date as the “Official Notification” date of withdrawal. If a student withdraws from the University during a course or between two courses, but not at the end of their semester, regulations involving the return of federal financial aid apply. If a student withdraws at the end of their semester, regulations involving the return of federal funds do not apply. 
Notification Not Given: If a student fails to complete the withdrawal form and leaves during a course or between courses for which they are pre-registered, the student will be considered to have withdrawn without notification and the last day of attendance will be used as the official withdrawal date. If a student has withdrawn, the student’s registration for future classes will be cancelled and the student will be considered withdrawn from the institution as of the last date of attendance the previous term.  





COURSE DESCRIPTIONS  

 All courses are three (3) semester credits unless otherwise indicated in parentheses following the course name below. Undergraduate courses are numbered in the range 100 through 499. Courses numbered less than 100 are developmental. In general, lower-level courses are numbered 100 through 299 and upper-level courses are numbered 300 through 499; however, there are exceptions as are noted in some courses’ descriptions. Courses numbered 500 through 699 are master’s courses; those numbered 700 and higher are post-masters.  
 
ABA101 – Introduction to Behavior Therapy (2 credits) 
In this course, students will gain a foundational understanding of child development, autism spectrum disorders, and the role of the registered behavior therapist. In addition to the key RBT exam components of Measurement, Assessment, Skill Acquisition, Behavior Reduction, Documentation Reporting, Professional Conduct, and Scope of Practice students will be introduced to basic terminology, billing practices, and writing skills needed for proper care documentation. Students will also start to develop an understanding of self-care and how to participate as a member of a care team. 
ABA101L – Clinical Placement Practicum (1 credit) 
The clinical placement practicum is designed to provide students with the opportunity to experience the requirements of a registered behavior technician in a clinical setting, demonstrate competencies required for the RBT exam, and develop the basic professional skills required for effective care. During this practicum, students will be required to participate in a clinical visit during week one and complete a weeklong practicum prior to the completion of the course. 
 
ABA102 – Applied Behavior Analysis (3 credits) 
This course is designed to build on the RBTs understanding of autism spectrum disorders (ASD) and identification of skill deficits and behavioral challenges often exhibited by individuals diagnosed with ASD and related disabilities. Students will learn the skills required to effectively apply the recommendations of an ABA therapist while broadening their understanding of ABA therapy techniques. Students will also build on their understanding of autism related terminology, self-care, professionalism, and resiliency. 
 
ACC111 – Principles of Accounting (3 credits) 
This lower-level course presents the concepts which underlie the accumulation, summarization, and reporting of financial information relative to a business entity. Details the accounting processes for different types of businesses: service, manufacturing, retail, sole proprietorships, and partnerships. Explains inventory costing methods, accruals, deferrals, plant assets, depreciation methods. 
 
ACC112 – Principles of Accounting 2 (3 credits) 
This lower-level course is a continuation of financial accounting principles applied to the corporation. Provides a thorough treatment of managerial accounting processes; cash fund flow reporting and analysis; CVP analysis; analysis of financial statements, ratio analysis; and numerous other topics. Prerequisite: ACC111. 
ACC304 – Financial Accounting (3 credits) 
This intermediate accounting course examines the reporting of current and non-current assets, income, and cash flow. Topics include financial statement analysis and the conceptual framework of accounting, as well as financial reporting to internal and external stakeholders. Conceptual materials are reinforced with practical applications. Prerequisite: ACC112. 
 
ACC305 – Financial Accounting 2 (3 credits) 
This intermediate accounting course examines the reporting of long-term receivables, investments, stockholders' equity items, income recognition, and the measurement of net assets. Topics include accounting for income taxes (as distinct from federal taxation), post-employment benefits, leases, earning per share, account changes and errors, and changes in prices. Conceptual materials are reinforced with practical applications. Prerequisite: ACC304 
 
ACC312 – Federal Taxation (3 credits) 
Federal Taxation traces the development of federal taxation and its purposes. Examines the rules and regulations of the current tax laws governing the taxation of personal income and corporate income. 
 
ACC316 – Cost Accounting (3 credits) 
This course uses various methods and approaches to support decision-making. Topics include the analysis cost variances from predetermined cost standards, indirect and direct costs, and allocations of costs internally. Emphasis is on accounting tools to support manufacturing operations and the procedures used by management to control costs. 
 
ACC411 – Auditing (3 credits) 
This course examines the nature and theory surrounding the audit of financial statements with emphasis on the procedures and techniques used during an audit engagement. Additionally, generally accepted auditing standards are reviewed in conjunction with the role, responsibility, and liability of the auditor. 
 
ACC412 – Corporate Taxation (3 credits) 
This advanced course in corporate taxation emphasizes the formation and overall structure of corporations. The tax impact with respect to company events such as capitalization, liquidation, combinations, divestitures, and operations are examined. The course cites policy and provides examples to review complex topics in the areas of corporate tax and leverage. The concepts of accounting periods, tax rates and methods are examined along with tax treatment associated with expenses and deductions. 
 
ACC515 – Accounting for Managers (3 credits) 
Students will survey accounting principles and practices to learn the rationale for and implications of important accounting concepts and accounting procedures necessary to analyze and evaluate financial statements. The course examines budgeting, profit planning, budget control processes, tax planning, inventory management, cash forecasting, financial reporting, required financial disclosures, and international monetary transactions. Emphasis is placed on the use and importance of financial statements in the managerial decision-making process and ethical standards in accounting. Case studies and readings in accounting are used for practical application. 
 
ACC780 – Accounting in a Global Financial Community (3 credits)  
This course presents financial accounting to resolve problems of asymmetric information and to facilitate contracting. It develops ideas from decision theory and information economics to emphasize that accounting serves important purposes in society, of enhancing trust and meeting information needs. The global enterprise organization will be emphasized given the complex nature of its accounting needs. 
 
ACC785 – Accounting Control Systems (3 credits) 
This course asks students to research how employees and organizations introduce control systems. The course emphasizes the consequences and complexities of control with respect to manager strategies. Controller’s functions and roles are evaluated within organizations and their impact. 

ACC790 – Financial Reporting Theory (3 credits) 
This course emphasizes International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) rules so financial statements will be consistent, transparent consistent, transparent, and comparable around the world. Further, it is stressed that companies maintain and report their accounts, defining types of transactions and events with financial impact. 
 
BIO110 – General Biology (3 credits) | BIO111 – General Biology 2 (3 credits) 
This series is an introduction to the structure and composition of living organisms at the cellular and macromolecule levels. An overview of the chemistry of life includes the properties of water and a survey of biological macromolecules. The organization and function of prokaryotic vs. eukaryotic cells are compared, followed by consideration of the energy pathways central to metabolism in plants, animals, and bacteria. The cell cycle, mitosis, and meiosis are introduced in discussions of cellular reproduction. An overview of genetics focuses on concepts from organismal heredity down to the nature of a gene. The diversity of life is explored by consideration of its evolutionary origins, phylogenetic relatedness, physiology, and ecological relationships. Evolution topics include natural selection, population genetics, and speciation. Characteristics and representative of all five kingdoms and the major phyla are discussed comparatively. The ecological topics of population dynamics, species interactions, community organization and ecosystem description and function conclude the course. Throughout the year, laboratory sections will be selected to reinforce some of these concepts and to foster the scientific skills of observation and analytical reasoning. This is the required prerequisite biology sequence for biological science majors regardless of the upper division of specialization. 
 

BIO112 – General Biology Laboratory (3 credits)
BIL 110 General Biology Lab 1 (1 Credit) and BIlL111 General Biology Lab 2 (1 Credit)
This laboratory course is intended to reinforce some of the theoretical concepts addressed during the BIO110-111 sequence and to foster the scientific skills of observation and analytical reasoning. This laboratory course will satisfy part of the laboratory science requirements for the BS degree in Biology. 
 
BIO123 – Human Nutrition (3 credits) 
This course provides an overview of the principles of human nutrition. Topics include a description of the pathophysiologic effects of nutrients, vitamins, toxins, and electrolytes on the human body. The importance of maintaining a homeostatic state of health in terms of nutrition by maintaining a fluid and electrolyte balance will be presented. In this course, the student will learn how nutrients interact with the various body systems. The ways that food and liquid intake affects digestion, absorption of nutrients, nutrient deficiencies, food toxicities, and nursing interventions that the professional nurse can use to manage these factors will be introduced. How diet can affect health and disease processes will be addressed. The importance of maintaining adequate hydration, especially in the elderly and those who are immunocompromised will be discussed. Prerequisite: SCI105. 


BIO210 – Anatomy & Physiology 1 (3 credits) | BIO211 – Anatomy & Physiology 2 (3 credits) 
The series of courses covers the structure and function of human anatomy and physiology. Structure and function will be presented from the subcellular and macromolecular levels to the whole-organ and systems levels. Function will be presented with special emphasis on the interrelationships inherent in the intra- as well as inter-organ feedback systems. 
BIL 210 Anatomy & Physiology Lab 1 (1 Credit)
This Lab course introduces human anatomical orientations, physiology of muscular system, axial and appendicular skeleton, gross anatomy of the muscular system joints and overview of the skeletal system. Prerequisite: BIO 210
BIL 211 Anatomy & Physiology Lab 2 (1 Credit)
This Lab course introduces the anatomy and physiology of sensory organs, central nervous system, integumentary system, peripheral nervous system, tissue histology with dissections. Prerequisite: BIO 211.

BIO217 – Microbiology & Pathophysiology for Health Professionals (3 credits) 
This course builds on foundational knowledge of normal human anatomy and physiology to incorporate concepts of microbiology and pathophysiology to help the student to better understand the physiologic processes occurring within the human body. Topics include the effect and progression of selected disease states in diverse and transcultural populations across the lifespan from birth to death. Cellular function and the function of human organs will be covered in depth. Prerequisite: BIO210. 
BIO260 – Kinesiology and Biomechanics (3 credits) 
This course is designed to link the basics of skeletal structure, anatomy, the motor learning components of the central nervous system, and skeletal muscle function, to basic Newtonian mechanics and general force-velocity physics. Special emphasis is the application of this information to real-life situations. Prerequisite: BIO211 (Cross-listed as PED250) 
 
BIO365 – Physiology of Exercise and Performance Assessment (3 credits) 
The study of the physiological changes accompanying acute and chronic exercise. Lecture and laboratory experiences are planned to enable the student to develop, administer, and evaluate physiological tests and prescribe exercise-training procedures. This is intended to emphasize application-specific content. Prerequisite: BIO211 (Cross- listed as PED395) 
 
BIO441 – Active Nutritional Assessment of Athletes (3 credits) 
This course provides students with the opportunity to gain practical experience in improving and supporting athletic performance through nutrition. It includes the nutritional importance on performance optimization in endurance, power and speed applications. The logistics of meal timing, circadian rhythms and sleep will be taught with a personalized nutritional plans and projects. Prerequisite: BIO211. 
 
BIO442 – Microbiology (3 credits) 
Studies prokaryotic and eukaryotic micro-organisms and their viruses. Emphasis will be on culture techniques and the principles of identification. Topics include the engineering and utilization of microorganisms as related to the immune system. Prerequisite: BIO211. 

       BIL 442 – Microbiology Lab (1 Credit)
	          An introduction to microbiological techniques and prokaryotic  and 			eukaryotic organism culture. Sterile procedures and the use of 		 	  advanced microscopic techniques are included. Microbial       	identification  techniques, both classical and molecular, are also explored.

 
BIO444 – Pathophysiology (3 credits) 
Using the fundamental concepts of anatomy and physiology of cellular function and structure, tissues, organs, and organ systems. This course explores the altered regulatory mechanisms associated with disease. Topics center on the associated diseases involving the circulatory, respiratory, gastrointestinal, endocrine and metabolism, hematological and immunological systems, neuromuscular, and renal systems. Prerequisite: CHM211. 
BIO445 – Pathophysiology of Gut and Nutrition (3 credits) 
This course introduces the basic literature on gut microbiome, physiological significance and the nutritional importance of gut-brain axis that influences the behavior of an individual. This course explores the regulatory mechanisms associated with gastrointestinal disease. Topics center on the associated diseases involving the gastrointestinal permeability, endocrine system, and metabolism. Prerequisite: BIO444 
 
BIO449 – Natural Therapies & Exercise Physiology (3 credits) 
This course discusses the biological significance of alternative therapies including herbal supplements, yoga, and meditation for the better performance of exercise and various sports activities using interventional physiology. Prerequisite: BIO211 | CHM211. 
BIO460 – Human Nutrition and Physical Performance (3 credits) 
This advanced course will provide a thorough examination of the interrelationships between optimal nutrition absorption and various nutrients for better athletic performance. It focusses on the nutrient requirements, hormones and growth factors, metabolism, and integration of dietary supplements. Prerequisite: CHM351. 
 


BIO495 – Biology Internship (3 credits) 
Students engage in practical experience with an agency or organization specific to their field of study. Students will apply outcomes acquired through the BSBIO program courses. Students will work under the direct supervision of a senior-level professional at an approved agency, organization, or company. Students will be enrolled in a distance education course and will be required to submit assignments and documents that demonstrate what has been learned through the internship. 
 
BIO499 – Senior Capstone Project (3 credits) 
Seniors will work with their faculty mentor to construct and produce a comprehensive project related to biological sciences. Prerequisite: Senior standing 
 
BUS110 – Survey of Business (3 credits) 
This course is an introduction to each of the principal functional areas of the business curriculum including accounting, finance, management, and marketing.  The course stresses how these areas are combined to form one integrated operating business unit. Topics include an overview of the role of the business sector in the global economy within the private enterprise system.

BUS201 – Personal Financial Planning (3 credits) 
This course will provide an understanding of basic money management skills, financial decision-making, and fundamental financial planning. Goal setting, determining an individual’s current financial situation and identifying opportunity costs and alternatives will be part of this course. There will be an emphasis on personal tax planning, estate planning, budgeting, and applying for and the costs associated with obtaining credit. Buying versus renting decisions will be detailed as well as financing the purchase of a home. Homeowners and Health Insurance will be covered along with investing in stocks, bonds, and mutual funds. 
 
BUS202 – Introduction to Business Operations (3 credits) 
This survey course will provide a fundamental understanding of the concepts of producing goods versus providing services. The aspects of competitive analysis, strategy and productivity will be discussed. The course will cover basic product and service design as well as capacity planning for products and services. The concepts with respect to process selection, facilities layout, measurement, location planning and analysis and quality control will be emphasized. 

BUS323 – Commercial Law (3 credits) 
This upper-level course is an introduction to the basic principles and rules of commercial law. This course covers the fundamentals of business law, including contracts, torts, fraud, contracting, labor relations, state and federal statutes, and alternative conflict resolution. Topics include constitutional law, criminal law, personal liability, negligence, strict liability, malfeasance, piercing the veil, common law, contract theory, and the Uniform Commercial Code. Ethical concepts are emphasized throughout the course. 
  


BUS440 – International Law and Public Policy (3 credits) 
This advanced course is designed to challenge students to develop a broad understanding of the global legal, regulatory, and public policy systems and how they affect them as business managers and leaders. Businesses have become increasingly subject to international as well as local and national laws, regulations, and public policies. Legal and regulatory provisions pervade such aspects of business as trade practices, marketing practices, environmental practices, intellectual properties, ethics and business relationships with employees, customers, and other interested parties. This course assists students in developing their ability to meet the ethical, legal, and regulatory demands and responsibilities of conducting business in a contemporary global environment. 
 
BUS495 – Business Internship (3 credits) 
Students engage in practical experience with an agency or organization specific to their field of study. Students will apply outcomes acquired through the BSBA program courses. Students will work under the direct supervision of a senior-level professional at an approved agency, organization, or company. Students will be enrolled in an distance education course and will be required to submit assignments and documents that demonstrate what has been learned through the internship 
 
BUS500 – Applied Business Statistics (3 credits) 
A study of statistical methods, probability distributions, hypothesis testing, regression, transformation, analysis of variance, chi-square, time series analysis, forecasting, and queuing theory. Emphasis is on the practical application of management science tools to solve business problems and using computer applications of business statistical methods. 
 
BUS554 – Business Law (3 credits) 
This course emphasizes business ethics and social responsibility within the context of commercial law. Tort and contract law as well as legal concepts such as consideration and agreements are explored. Topics include liability, consumer credit and secured transactions as well as mortgages from the accountants’ perspective. In addition, the legal aspects of bankruptcy, the principal and agency relationship, business formation, securities regulation, employment law, antitrust law, unfair trade practices and management/labor agreements are detailed. (Cross-listed as ACC554) 
 
BUS600 – Organizational Behavior, Leadership and Ethics (3 credits) 
A study of the practices and ethical consequences managers employ in planning, organizing, leading, and controlling formal and informal organizational behavior and corporate culture. Topics include self-awareness, perception, motivation, learning, attitude, stress management, leadership, group dynamics, teamwork, communication, power and authority, delegation, time management, organizational structure, organizational development, change process, continuous improvement, operations of virtual organizations, strategic partnerships, joint ventures, and management control systems. 
BUS620 – Foundations of Project Management (3 credits) 
This survey course will develop students’ fundamental understanding of the basic framework of Project Management. Students will discuss project definitions, the project life cycle including feasibility, pre-planning, implementation, handover, delivery of benefit and close out. The control process will be discussed using what if scenario analysis to plan for contingencies. The transformational skills necessary to successfully complete projects such communication and other soft skills will be explored. Prerequisite: Advanced Standing.  
BUS621 – Project Performance and Measurement (3 credits) 
This advanced course will prepare students to demonstrate how project managers evaluate project performance and measure their results. The student will be able to show how businesses are impacted with respect to the projects they choose to implement and how improvements or changes are made. Students will be able to determine if a project is realizing its outcomes. Students will be able to better market future project management within an enterprise using information gathered during successful implementations. Prerequisite: Advanced Standing. 
 
BUS633 – Project Management and Budgeting (3 credits) 
Project management is an essential discipline for managers to master. This course covers the concepts and skills necessary for project managers to plan, propose projects, secure resources, budget, and lead project teams. Students will explain competitive advantages gained by using project management processes compared to ad hoc methods and to other organizational strategies. Topics covered by the course include the major elements of the Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK) as defined by the 
Project Management Institute, whose Project Management Professional (PMP) and 
Certified Associate in Project Management (CAPM) certifications are recognized internationally. Computer exercises and examples in project management will be used to demonstrate knowledge and abilities in defining a project, estimating project costs and times, developing a schedule, managing risks, and managing teams. (Cross-listed as IT633.)

BUS640 – International Law and Public Policy (3 credits)
International Law and Public Policy’s intent is to challenge students to expand and deepen their understanding of the social conditions and values driving public policies, while learning the specific laws relevant to common issues arising in the context international relations and business transactions. The general topics covered include: statute and case law relative to international sales of goods and financial transaction; international business disputes and the related legal constructs; and international trade organizations and treaties. Additional issues are addressed as noted in the assignment calendar.
 
BUS650 – Global Business Operations (3 credits) 
Global Business Operations is a study of global business concepts and
management practices. Students learn about the impact of external and internal environments, the influence of cultural, social, political, legal, and economic factors affecting business operations, theories of trade and foreign direct investment, balance of payments account, economic integration, trade policies, foreign exchange transactions, contract terms, organizational structures and control of global operations, forms of business entry, including strategic alliances, joint ventures, and foreign direct investment, marketing, distribution, supply chain management, logistics, consumer behavior in international markets, global market
extension, and positioning for competitive advantage. Students will conduct case analysis, learn to solve practical management problems, and develop written and oral presentations. 

BUS660 – Management Utilization of Technology (3 credits) 
This course integrates and extends the technology-specific knowledge gained by the student in the various subject disciplines and from real world experience. Emphasis is placed on the view of a Chief Information Officer (CIO) to understand how information technology is used to improve business performance, both strategically and operationally. Topics discussed include the use of technology at different levels of an organization, management information systems, ERP in managerial decision-making, operational excellence, competitive positioning, and change implementation. (Cross-listed as IT660.) 
 
BUS670 – Global Challenges of Communications & Human Resources Management (3 credits) 
Introduces students to the perspectives and dimensions of human resource management and policy development. Students will study the process of bringing people and organizations together for the purpose of achieving stated goals. Emphasis is placed on the growing need to link strategic planning and human resource planning. Topics include job analysis, workflow management, diversity, recruiting, staffing, training, human resource development, performance appraisal, human resource policies, employment laws, employment benefits, employee relations, workplace safety and health issues, downsizing, outsourcing, human resource planning and resource allocation, and the effect of cultural, political, and legal environment on human resource management across national boundaries. Students will be involved in case analysis, team projects, and oral and written presentations. 
 
BUS671 – Strategic Human Resource Planning and Ethics (3 credits) 
This course focuses on the need for long-term human resources planning strategies to develop a well-trained, diverse workforce. Topics include short- and long-term human resource planning and the role of human resource management in the overall organizational planning process. Ethics and social responsibility are emphasized throughout the course.

BUS672 – Talent Acquisition and Employee Development and Compensation (3 credits) 
This course prepares the professional to identify, recruit, hire, and develop people who will fit the organization. Key areas of discussion include internal and external recruiting, job analysis and design, employee motivation performance evaluation, and compensation.

BUS673 – Negotiation and Conflict Resolution (3 credits) 
This course explores labor/management relations in a holistic manner. Topics include conflict and dispute resolution, the negotiation process, negotiation strategies, and mediation. In addition, the student evaluates interpersonal skills to help managers and employees create a positive working environment and work outcomes.

BUS698 – Directed Readings and Research (3 credits) 
This is a research- and writing-intensive course that focuses on creating new knowledge in the field of the students’ specializations. The work product is an electronic portfolio that demonstrates rigor and a systematic approach to synthesizing quantitative, qualitative, and mixed methods research findings. It is anticipated the portfolio not only will show mastery of the specialization content areas but also provides help for the student seeking a promotion or entering a new career. 
 
BUS699 – Enterprise Strategic Planning and Change Management (3 credits) 
This capstone course is a review of modern strategic thinking and change management for the purpose of integrating three major types of challenges in steering an organization: (1) internal and external analytical assessment, (2) world uncertainty and unexpected events, and (3) human psychology and inertia. In connecting these tangible and intangible issues in the strategies process, the student will learn how internal and external forces do not always align with human energy, and as a result the strategy that emerges is not always the intended one. Simulation exercises, case analysis, and synthesis of cross-functional practices will be applied in teamwork and written and oral presentations. 
 
BUS700 – Management of Operations (3 credits) 
This course examines the responsibilities of the operations manager in developing and implementing efficiency strategies in production, supply chain, and overall operations of the organization. The course seeks to provide an understanding of those managerial concepts and quantitative tools required in the design, operation, and control of production systems, including supply chain management, procurement, logistics, and the design of both facility layout and work processes.  Management, capacities, layouts, project control, job design, performance standards, forecasting, inventory, quality, and approaches to change are considered. 
 
BUS705 – Developing Projects (3 credits) 
This course examines and applies project management skills focusing on the practice of initiating, planning, executing, controlling, and closing the work of a team to achieve specific goals and meet specific success criteria at the specified time. Emphasis is placed on the primary constraints which are scope, time, quality and budget. 
BUS710 – Project Management in the Enterprise (3 credits) 
This course will cover concepts and ideas to deliver your organization's strategic outcomes through dynamic project portfolio management in an enterprise environment. Study the processes for successfully managing a complex portfolio of projects and analyzing opportunities for improved portfolio performance. 
 
CAPM101 – Certified Associate Project Management I (3 credits) 
This course will assist students in preparing for the Certified Associate in Project Management (CAPM) exam. Students will learn the definitions, terminologies, knowledge areas, processes, tools, and techniques that are required to take a project from the initiation process to completion. This course identifies project management standards 
and best practices to effectively manage a project and introduces the Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK® Guide), which offers a standardized approach to deliverables every Project Manager needs to successful project accomplishment. 
 
CAPM102 – Certified Associate Project Management II (3 credits) 
This course will assist students in preparing for the Certified Associate in Project Management (CAPM) exam. This course is highly effective, exam-focused study resource. The CAPM® Certified Associate in Project Management Practice Exams contains practice questions and is fully aligned with the Project Management Body of Knowledge® Guide, Sixth Edition. All questions simulate those on the live test in content, style, tone, and difficulty. To facilitate retention, every question is accompanied by in-depth explanations for both correct and incorrect answers. 
 
CHM110 – General Chemistry (3 credits) | CHM111 – General Chemistry 2 (3 credits) This is an introduction to the basic calculations and conversions involving the chemical laws and principles of physical chemistry. Topics include modern theories of atomic and molecular structure from quantum chemistry, basic qualitative and quantitative analysis, elementary inorganic chemistry, and some organic chemicals. The laboratory sections help to foster the following scientific skills: observation, analytical reasoning, and the manipulation of glassware, equipment, and chemicals. This is the required prerequisite chemistry sequence for biological science majors regardless of the upper division specialization. 
 
CHL 110 General Chemistry Lab 1 (1 Credit) and CHL 111 General Chemistry 2 (1 Credit)
CHM112 – General Chemistry Lab (3 credits) 
The laboratory course provides hands-on experience with the general procedures and fundamental chemical reactions. This laboratory course will satisfy part of the laboratory science requirements for the B.S. degree in Biology. Prerequisite: CHM110  and CHM 111 or concurrent. 
 
CHM210 – Organic Chemistry (3 credits) | CHM211 – Organic Chemistry 2 (3 credits)
This course addresses the chemistry of carbon-containing compounds. Topics include structure, physical properties, and chemical properties of the common classes of organic compounds and functional groups; basic spectroscopy, including IR, UV, NMR, and MS; functional group preparation and interconversions; and stereochemistry. Prerequisite: CHM111 and PHY111. 
CHLM2102 – Organic Chemistry Lab 1 (1 Credit) and CHL211- Organic Chemistry Lab 2 (13 Ccredits) 
This lab course provides hands-on experience with organic reactions, synthesis  and functional group manipulations.  This lab also includes computer simulations labs for performing experiments virtually. Prerequisite: CHM210 or concurrent. 
 
CHM350 – Biochemistry (3 credits) | CHM351 – Biochemistry 2 (3 credits) 
This two-course sequence covers all of the fundamentals of biochemistry. Emphasis is placed on the three-dimensional structure of proteins and membranes, and the methodological theories related to their measurement. Topics include protein sequence analysis for evolutionary relationships, enzyme kinetics and mechanisms, carbohydrates, bioenergetics, pathways of intermediary metabolism, metabolic control mechanisms, and the cellular biochemistry of biosynthesis, anabolism, and catabolism. Prerequisite: BIO211 and CHM211. 
 
CJU101 – Survey of Criminal Justice (3 credits) 
This course provides an introductory overview of the criminal justice system to include topics on police, courts and corrections. A brief history of the American criminal justice system is provided along with its current state of development. 
 
CJU205 – Criminal Law (3 credits) 
A study of the history and sources of criminal law coupled with an analysis of the substantive elements of specific offenses. 
 
CJU210 – Criminal Evidence and Procedure (3 credits) 
A study of criminal procedure from arrest to post-conviction remedies and laws of evidence. Laws of arrest, search and seizure, right to counsel, due process, civil remedies and other topics are discussed. Prerequisite: CJU205. 
 
CJU215 – Police Operations (3 credits) 
This course will introduce students to the basic police functions. It will include exploration of the philosophical and historical development of the police, police roles, types of patrol, community oriented policing, volunteer policing, and crime prevention techniques. 
CJU220 – Corrections Systems and Operations (3 credits) 
Analysis and evaluation of contemporary institutional and community based corrections systems, along with probation and parole. Topics include the basic concepts for influencing and changing human behavior; a study of correctional management, structures and operations including treatment, security, custody, and discipline of the inmates; the legal responsibilities of the state from conviction to release; pre-sentence investigations, sentencing, loss, and restoration of civil rights. 

CJU221 – Juvenile Justice (3 credits) 
This course will cover the juvenile justice system within the United States and around the world. The course will explore the legal issues associated with juvenile justice, including how juveniles enter the system, progress through the various stages of the system, and exit the system. Students will learn about unique challenges faced by criminal justice professionals in juvenile lockup facilities, probation, and intermediate sanctions such as residential treatment, wilderness/challenge programs, and intensive outpatient programs. 

CJU230 – Criminal Investigation and Forensics (3 credits) 
A study of the logical and scientific principles necessary for the detection and investigative analysis of criminal activities. Topics include wiretaps, undercover operations, use of informants, video surveillance and extradition. The study of elements of microscopy, spectroscopy and basic chemistry as they apply to the study of firearms, hair, fibers, blood, paint, tools, glass, documents, and other materials that comprise physical evidence. 
 
CJU233 – Crisis Intervention (3 credits) 
This course exposes the student to practical knowledge for handling crisis situations in both police and corrections to include initial response and mediation. It will explore the development of the field of crisis intervention and the role of the criminal justice system to include response, recovery, investigation, and psychological issues focusing on best practices. 
 
CJU235 – Security (3 credits) 
A study of the internal and external causes of losses to business and industry, and the development and implementation of counter-measures necessary to insure the protection of assets. Personnel screening and the security of information storage are covered. 
 
CJU242 – Domestic Violence (3 credits) 
This course introduces the student to domestic and family crimes of violence and examines offenders and offenses, the criminal justice system’s response and the impact of these crimes on victims and families. Other specific topics will focus on why these offenses occur and how they are carried out. 
 
CJU270 – Terrorism (3 credits) 
This course provides a history of terrorism and a look at the current state of terrorism around the world. Students are introduced to various parts of the world and the terrorist groups that originate and operate there. The course examines terrorist events and analyzes the impact of terrorism on society along with the criminal justice system’s responses to terrorism. 
 
CJU300 – Police Administration (3 credits) 
This course will examine the supervision level of police organizations. There will be an in- depth exploration of organizational structures, administrative problems, and principles of administration. The course will focus on employee morale and discipline. 

CJU315 – Patrol and Community Policing (3 credits) 
This course involves policing and patrol operations at the neighborhood and community levels. The focus is on community policing and problem solving along with the various processes that are in use under COPPS to prevent and control crime. The course examines day-to-day patrol practices and tactics that support community policing initiatives across the country. 
 
CJU325 – White Collar and Computer Crime (3 credits) 
An examination of corporate and occupational deviance issues will be introduced in this course. Topics include the history of white collar crime in America, governmental and political corruption, organized crime, employee deviance, computer crime, and corporate negligence. Prerequisite: CJU205. 
CJU405 – Constitutional Law (3 credits) 
This course will take an in-depth look at important cases that have passed through the U.S. Supreme Court. Their historical and political impact on the criminal justice system will be explored. Prerequisite: CJU205. 
 
CJU408 – Criminal Justice Research and Statistics (3 credits) 
This course is designed to give students a basic understanding of the research design and statistical methods currently employed in the field of criminal justice. Students will be able to identify and access criminal justice research publications and databases at state, national, and international levels. 
 
CJU440 – Ethics in Criminal Justice (3 credits) 
Examination of ethical issues faced by all criminal justice practitioners will be introduced in this course. Ethics in law enforcement, corrections, and the courts will be discussed in great detail to allow students the chance to formulate and comprehend their own ethical systems of belief. 
 
CJU441 – Introduction to Crime Scene Photography (3 credits) 
This course includes basic crime scene photography skills including camera operation and exposure control, proficiency in relational photos and flash control for crime scenes and evidentiary documentation. Prerequisite: CJU205. 
 
CJU442 – Fingerprints and Impression Evidence (3 credits) 
This course emphasizes the techniques involved in the gathering of impression evidence including fingerprints, tire marks, tool marks, bite marks and shoe prints. Students will learn the tools and skills needed for pattern recognition, preservation, classification and presentation at trial. 
 
CJU443 – Crime Scenes Management (3 credits) 
This course exposes the student to the forensic value, handling, preservation, testing and documentation of biological evidence. This course addresses safety issues involved in handling biological evidence. Identify the various blood splatter patterns and their importance in the crime scene. 

	CJU444	Ballistics and Firearm Identification (3 credits) 
The study of forensic firearms identification, forensic laboratory analysis of firearms and ammunition evidence, and the basic skills in the investigation of firearms related crimes. 
 
CJU446 – Digital Evidence (3 credits) 
This course presents the numerous ways in which technology is used by both criminals and forensic investigators. Students will learn to recognize digital evidence, its importance to an investigation, how to collect and preserve it and the tools available for processing useful evidence from recovered electronic and digital devices. 
 


CJU447 – Homeland Security (3 credits) 
This course provides an overview of the basic principles of homeland security, including the events of 9/11 and the formation of the US Department of Homeland Security. Topics include a history of homeland security, terrorism, natural disasters, legal foundations, emergency preparedness, intelligence gathering and all-hazards responses. 
 
CJU448 – Emergency Management (3 credits) 
This course focuses on the principles of emergency management and their foundation in national, state and local requirements. The principles of emergency planning and risk assessment are presented. Topics include mitigation, preparedness, communications, response and recovery. 
 
CJU449 – Criminal Justice Management (3 credits) 
This course covers modern management theory in criminal justice and presents the application of management techniques appropriate to each area of the criminal justice system. Among the key topics are civil liability, political power, ethics, and interagency cooperation. 
 
CJU450– Special Topics (3 credits) 
This course provides students with an advanced study of contemporary trends and issues in criminal justice, homeland security, and special police operations. The course includes instruction and discussion of current events in the field with a focus on how criminal justice is changing and the direction of future challenges. International and national challenges are included. 
 
CJU451 – Incident Command and Management (3 credits) 
This course focuses on national approaches to critical incident management of all types of disasters and incidents according to the National Response Framework (NRF), the National Incident Management System (NIMS), and the Incident Command System (ICS). Students will learn and apply the principles of ICS to simulated incidents. 
 
CJU495 – Criminal Justice Internship (3 credits) 
Students engage in practical experience with an agency or organization specific to their field of study. Students will apply outcomes acquired through the BACJ program courses. Students will work under the direct supervision of a senior-level professional at an approved agency, organization or company. Students will be enrolled in a distance education course and will be required to submit assignments and documents that demonstrate what has been learned through the internship. 

	CJU499 – Senior Capstone Project (3 credits) 
Summary research/experiential project required for graduation. Prerequisite: Senior standing. 
 
CJU505 – Criminological Theory (3 credits) 
This course focuses on criminological theories and how they are used to guide research, formulate policy, and address crime. Specific theories are analyzed and applied to criminal justice issues such as crime prevention, criminal investigations, and criminal procedures. Students will examine criminological theories and their connection to research efforts. They will then evaluate current research and applications that affect the policy and procedure decision-making processes. 
 
CJU510 – Research Methods in Criminal Justice (3 credits) 
This course analyzes recent research in the field of criminal justice to allow students the opportunity to evaluate criminal justice studies and discuss methods to identify gaps in the body of knowledge in the field and propose new avenues of research. Students will use this knowledge to develop the groundwork for research projects to fill these gaps using principles of theory, design and methodology. Students will also perform data analysis and report results using various analytical tools. 
 
CJU515 – Criminal Justice Policy Analysis (3 credits) 
Students in this course analyze and evaluate policies currently in use by various criminal justice organizations and their influence on the organization and the larger community. Legal and practical issues are evaluated to illustrate the effects of both intended and unintended outcomes. Students will propose new policies, or revisions to current policies, to better achieve desired policy goals. 
 
CJU520 – Ethics in Criminal Justice Management (3 credits) 
This course provides an in-depth view of ethical issues in criminal justice leadership, policy and decision making. Students will analyze the dimensions of ethical concerns in current events and build a framework for evaluating ethical questions. Students will also propose revised or new policies to address these ethical concerns within the framework of police-community involvement and the political environment. 
 
CJU535 – Management in Criminal Justice Organizations (3 credits). 
This course presents management and leadership principles as they apply to criminal justice organizations. These principles will then be used to evaluate organizational issues in criminal justice agencies and to formulate policies that influence the operation of various organizations within the criminal justice system. Principles of management in criminal justice organizations in international settings will be distinguished. 
 
CJU540 – Advanced Constitutional Law (3 credits) 
This course examines changing public opinion, ideology and behaviors that influence constitutional doctrine and Supreme Court decision making. Students will evaluate salient Supreme Court decisions and apply the legal principles to policies and procedures in the criminal justice field. Students will evaluate current social and criminal justice trends to determine future issues that likely will reach the Supreme Court for a decision. 

	CJU545	Law Enforcement and the Community (3 credits) 
This course delves deeply into the practice of law enforcement and policing in diverse community settings to include smart policing, predictive policing, and intelligence-led policing. Students will evaluate what has been working in police strategy and propose new avenues for improved police-community relations. International approaches will be researched in search of evidence-based best practices. 
 

CJU550 – Special Topics in Criminal Justice Administration (3 credits) 
This course focuses on timely issues in criminal justice theory and practice including but not limited to organizational theory, global challenges, ethical and legal issues, leadership, human resources, operations, and so forth. This course enables the student to undertake directed readings and research to explore a topic of their choosing in depth. 
The course may be repeated for credit with the approval of the academic advisor. Prerequisite: Faculty approval. 
 
CJU570 – Forensic Toxicology (3 credits) 
Forensic toxicology involves the detection and interpretation of the presence of drugs or other toxic compounds in bodily fluids and tissues. The collection and analyses must be done in a controlled setting such that the results are admissible in court. Extensive studies of the basic concepts of analytical chemistry for body fluid analyses and in-depth knowledge of pharmacology and toxicology encountered with abused and toxic substances are necessary to establish expertise. This course introduces these topics to the student to establish a foundation and general understanding, not to establish expertise. 
 
CJU580 – Forensic Biology (3 credits) 
This course covers the fundamentals of forensic biology. Forensic biology focuses data collected at crime scenes, focusing on DNA analysis. Data collection may include bodily fluids, hair, bones, and other items to support a criminal investigation. Evidence may be found on clothing, weapons, and other surfaces in addition to being on or in the victim.  Plant, animal, and insect evidence may be analyzed as well. The principles, methods, and techniques used in the identification and analysis of biological evidence are emphasized. This course introduces these topics to the student to establish a foundation and general understanding, not to establish expertise. 
 
CJU585 – Criminal Profiling (3 credits) 
This covers the concepts and principles of criminal profiling and its use during investigations of serial and special offenders. These include serial killers, serial rapists, and terrorists. Students will conduct a criminal profile analysis and formulate a criminal profile for use during an investigation. 
 
CJU598 – Research Project in Criminal Justice (3 credits) 
This course is the first half of the capstone sequence. CJU599 completes the capstone. Students in this course will demonstrate their ability to devise and propose a research project. The chosen topic will be based on a bibliographic search of scholarly literature to identify a current problem or challenge facing the field of criminal justice. The student will pick a topic that is tailored to the student’s specialization. With the approval of the assigned faculty, this topic will be the basis for writing a research proposal. 
 
CJU599 – Capstone (3 credits) 
The capstone for the Master of Science in Criminal Justice (MSCJ) comprises 2 courses: 
CJU598 and CJU599. Successful completion of CJU598 is a firm prerequisite for 
CJU599. Students in CJU599 will demonstrate their mastery of the MSCJ Core and Specialization courses. They also will demonstrate their ability to conduct basic research on criminal justice problems and challenges to contribute to decision-making. The final summative component is the preparation and presentation of a thorough portfolio analysis of their work in the MSCJ Core and Specialization using a growth-model approach and careful self-evaluation. Prerequisite: CJU598 

COM101 – Critical Reasoning and Research (3 Credits) 
In this course, students apply information literacy and critical reasoning to coursework and everyday life. Students will identify and evaluate sources of research, apply critical reasoning, and complete short critical-thinking essays on current events. Students will also develop the abilities to solve problems, analyze topics, and make well informed decisions by utilizing data, their life experiences, and current events. Students will actively explore university resources and use productivity software in the application of learning. This course is grounded in the Information Literacy Standards for Higher Education produced by the Association of College and Research Libraries. 
 
COM102 – Professional Communication and Technology (3 Credits) 
In this course, students will learn public speaking, writing skills, and presentations skills for use in the world of work. Combining communication theory and skills, students will develop their own communication strategies for success in employment and career building. The course has four components: public speaking, business writing, use of productivity tools (Microsoft® Word, Excel, PowerPoint, and others) and career growth. Students will use technology and software to demonstrate verbal strategies such as elevator pitches and presentations, traditional written correspondence, and electronic and social media writing. 

COM104 – Principles of Human Communication (3 credits) 
An introduction to the fundamental concepts involved in any communication situation. Contemporary theories and practice in intra-personal, interpersonal, small group, and public communication skills. Public oration analysis and formal oratory will be part of the course experience as well as specific needs public presentation format and delivery. Practical communication experience will be provided through classroom exercises, group projects and speeches. Use of technology-effective public presentations will be essential. 
 
CS100 – Principles of Computer Science (3 credits) 
Designed to appeal to a diverse audience, this course examines some of the fundamental ideas of the science of computing. Lectures and hands-on assignments cover a wide variety of topics such as hardware organization, the Internet, computer programming, limits of computing, and graphics.  
CS110 – Introduction to Computer Architecture (3 credits) 
A broad introduction to computer architecture, this course shows students how computers really work and how millions of transistors come together to form a complete computing system. Topics covered include transistors, logic gates, basic processor components, memory, input/output devices, and low-level machine instructions. 
 
CS120 – Fundamentals of Computation (3 credits) 
This course introduces students to the mathematical and theoretical foundations of computer science, and to their practical applications to computing. Topics include propositional and predicate logic, sets and functions, formal languages, finite automata, regular expressions, grammar, and Turing machines. 
 
CS130 – Fundamentals of Computer Graphics (3 credits) 
This course studies the principles underlying the generation and display of 3D computer graphics. Topics include geometric modeling, 3D viewing and projection, lighting and shading, color, and the use of one or more technologies and packages such as Adobe Photoshop, OpenGL, and Blender. Advanced topics might include ray tracing, radiosity, texture- and bump-mapping, the mathematics of curves and surfaces, volumetric rendering, and animation. (Cross-listed as IT130)

CS150 – Introduction to Programming (3 credits) 
An introduction to the theory and practice of computer programming, the emphasis of this course is on techniques of program development within the object-oriented paradigm. Topics include control structures, objects, classes, inheritance, simple data structures, and basic concepts of software development. (Cross-listed as IT150)
CS310 – Database Architectures (3 credits) 
This course provides coverage of concepts and skills required to implement an efficient database. Topics include relational algebra, entity-relationship and relational models, database design, query languages such as SQL, query processing, system architectures and storage and file structures. (Cross-listed as IT310)
 
CS323 – Methods of Software Development (3 credits) 
This course continues the study of software development by focusing on the methods of software design, development, and verification - the skills beyond fluency in a particular language which are necessary for developing large, reliable programs. Topics include object-oriented design, the use of APIs, and testing and verification. Techniques common in modern software development will be studied. Specific techniques may include GUIs and event-driven programming, multi-threading, client-server networking, fault-tolerant computing, stream programming, and security. 
 
CS325 – Intermediate Programming (3 credits) 
This course covers some of the more advanced fundamentals of programming including basic data structures (such as lists, stacks and queues, binary trees, and hash tables), recursion, common algorithms (such as searching and sorting), and generic programming. This course looks more deeply at object-oriented programming, including the use of class hierarchies. 

CS330 – Data Structures and Algorithms (3 credits) 
This course is a study of data structures and algorithms, focusing on algorithm design and analysis and the relationships between data representation, algorithm design, and program efficiency. Topics include advanced data structures, key algorithm design techniques, analysis of the time and space requirements of algorithms, and characterizing the difficulty of solving a problem. Concrete examples will be drawn from a variety of domains, such as algorithms for graphs and networks, cryptography, data compression, strings, geometric problems, indexing and search, numerical problems, and parallel computation. This course is required for the major in computer science. 
CS350 – Operating Systems (3 credits) 
An operating system such as Windows, Linux, or Mac OS X is a fundamental part of any computing system. It is responsible for managing all the running processes as well as allowing the processes to safely share system resources such as the hard drive and network. This course is a general introduction to the design and implementation of modern operating systems. The subjects to be covered include historical development of operating systems, concurrency, synchronization, scheduling, paging, virtual memory, input/output devices, files, and security. 

CS409 – Basic Networking (3 credits) 
This course provides students with the fundamentals of networking, while exposing students to simulations that lead to practical experience, and opportunities to fully understand Systems Development Life Cycle. The course teaches networking based on application, covering networking concepts within the context of network environments that students may encounter in their daily lives, from small office and home office (SOHO) networking to more complex enterprise and theoretical networking models. This course helps prepare students for entry-level career opportunities, continuing education, and certifications.  (Cross-listed as IT409)
 
CS420 – Information Systems Security (3 credits) 
This course introduces computer network security. Students successfully completing this course will be able to evaluate works in academic and commercial security and will have rudimentary skills in security research. The course begins with the tutorial of the basic elements of cryptography, cryptanalysis, and system security, and continues by covering several seminal papers and monographs on a wide range of security areas. (Cross-listed as IT420)
 
CS435 – Compilers and Languages (3 credits) 
This course explores the implementation of modern programming languages by looking at compiler design and construction. The course focuses mainly on object-oriented programming languages, although it will look briefly at compiling for languages from other programming paradigms. Major topics in compilation are covered, including scanning, parsing, semantic analysis, and code-generation. If time allows, the course will cover some advanced topics, including garbage collection and optimization. 

CS445 – Project Management (3 credits) 
This course focuses on the methods, tools, and techniques of managing projects, with a special emphasis on CS projects. Like all projects, CS project management must address initiating, planning, executing, controlling, and closing. An overarching task of project management is communicating clearly and frequently with stakeholders. This is especially true with the rapid pace, technical complexity, and frequent change requests that are experienced by most CS project managers. The topics covered in this course align with the Project Management Institute’s PMBOK® Guide. (Cross-listed as IT445)
 
CS495 – Computer Science Internship (3 credits) 
Students engage in practical experience with an agency or organization specific to their field of study. Students will apply outcomes acquired through the CS program courses. Students will work under the direct supervision of a senior-level professional at an approved agency, organization, or company. Students will be enrolled in a distance education course and will be required to submit assignments and documents that demonstrate what has been learned through the internship. 

CS499 – Senior Capstone (3 credits) 
This is a capstone course designed to integrate the knowledge gained in the various subject disciplines through the analysis and interpretation of selected case studies from a variety of organizations. Prerequisite: Senior standing. (Cross-listed as IT499)
 
ECO255 – Survey of Economics (3 credits) 
This survey course examines both microeconomic and macroeconomic theory. Topics include the laws of supply and demand, market equilibrium, basic financial markets, the money supply and banking system, price and output decisions, international trade, GDP and growth, and product and resources markets. Students will demonstrate a fundamental understanding of economic vocabulary and tools at the end of the course. 
ECO570 – Managerial Economics (3 credits) 
The course is a study of the use of economic theory in managing an organization. Students will develop the ability to apply economic analysis to the solution of problems faced by management and understand the economic basis for business policies and key economic concepts that can serve as a framework for business decisions, linear programming, forecasting, and economic modeling of financial investments. Emphasis is placed on understanding how economic modeling is used to make decisions on price, output, investment, and related matters, and the consequences of economic decisions. 
 
EDU101 – Foundations of Education (3 credits) 
This course examines learning theories and will apply those theories to how learning occurs. The course will cover the psychological, sociological, philosophical, and historical foundations of education in the context of schools: the past, the present, and the future from a global perspective. 
 
EDU222 – Technology Integration in the Classroom (3 credits) 
This course introduces integrating technology into PreK-12 teaching and learning. Concepts discussed include technological resources and digital tools to support instruction and classroom management. The ISTE National Technology Education Standards for Teachers and Students (NETS*T/NET*S) will be addressed. 

	EDU271	Human Development (3 credits) 
This course will examine the physical, mental, social, and emotional development of children from birth to adolescence. In addition, maturation and aging as it relates to schooling will be studied. Prerequisite: Education 101 or permission of the faculty. 
 
EDU272 – Educational Psychology (3 credits) 
The psychological implications of the learning process will be studied. An analysis of learning theory and the implications of exceptionality for the teaching/learning process will be made. Prerequisite: EDU101 and EDU271 or permission of the faculty. 
 
EDU362 – Reading across the Content Areas (3 credits) 
An applied approach combining experience with information from research to assist teacher education students in acquiring the basic competencies for helping students read materials in specific subject areas.  

EDU370 – Schools, Families and Communities (3 credits) 
This course provides teacher candidates with a knowledge of how to facilitate collaboration between families and community resources to support children and their learning. This includes discovery and analysis of how local schools and school districts utilize these resources in systematic ways. Required course fieldwork includes opportunities to gain exposure to, and experience with available community resources to support families. 
 
EDU376 – Materials and Methods of Teaching (3 credits) 
This course is designed to provide for those students who have been unable to take a special methods course in their department (except Physical Education). The course is intended to provide secondary education majors with a repertoire of teaching strategies, in-depth practice in lesson plan design, and the correlates of effective teaching. Prerequisite: Completion of Level I. 
 
EDU416 – Educational Assessment and Strategies (3 credits) 
The study of measurement and its relationship to evaluation techniques as they apply to educational research and application. Prerequisite: Completion of Level II. 
 
EDU436 – Classroom Environment & Management (3 credits) 
This course examines a variety of methods and procedures for setting up a positive classroom environment and managing a classroom with mutual respect between teacher and student. Prerequisite: Completion of Level II. 
 
EDU490 | EDU491 | EDU492 – Student Teaching (3 each) 
The middle and adolescent (secondary) teaching block is reserved for the student to perform professional courses and activities including student teaching in the classroom. This involves a twelve-week term used exclusively for student teaching in a comprehensive field or in two (2) teaching specializations according to the student’s program. In addition to classroom assignments, student teachers will participate in extra- curricular activities of the school and community. Prerequisite: Completion of Level II. 

	EDU497	Global Education Systems (3 credits) 
This course will focus on education in a multifaceted way, from the degree to which a country’s teachers regularly collaborate to parental involvement’s impact on achievement. The course will analyze different characteristics, policies, and processes of both successful and not so successful educational systems across the globe. 
 
EDU498 – Research Paper in Education (3 credits) 
In this course, students will be required to write a comprehensive research paper on a topic in education in their field as approved by their faculty. The focus of the class will be writing an effective research paper; however, students will also be exposed to new trends in PK-12 education. 
 
EDU499 – Trauma in Education (3 credits) 
Exposure to violence and other traumatic events can disrupt the ability to relate to others and to successfully manage emotions. In this course, students will discover the different types of traumas. They will be presented with the ways trauma impacts students and how they, as teachers, can identify and support students who may have experienced trauma. 
 
EDU505 – Research Methods (3 credits) 
This course is designed to enable students to evaluate and conduct research. The course comprises a study of research theory, research design, formatting conventions, and the critical analysis of published research reports. The role of Action Research in the context of making data-supported leadership decisions will be a central theme. 
 
EDU511 – Soft Skills and Conflict Management (3 credits) 
Conflict between individuals and groups can be detrimental to organization morale and results. This course explores how soft skills can be used to effectively resolve conflicts. Course presentation and discussion of soft skills will include such topics as personal habits, interpersonal skills, communication, social graces, and management vs. leadership practices. 

EDU520 Cultural Perspectives and Personal Beliefs as Learning Modifiers (3 credits) This course focuses on the teaching of literature and analysis of literature and other arts in the language arts classroom. Demonstrate in-depth knowledge of and use of varied teaching applications for works from a variety of genres and cultures, works by female authors, and works by authors of color. Contextual influences on teaching language arts are both a project and process of this course. Prepares prospective teachers of literature with an in-depth knowledge of and use of varied teaching applications for works from a variety of genres and cultures, works by female authors, works by authors of color with deference to the contextual influences on teaching language arts. 
 
EDU521 – Play and the Development of Learning Awareness (3 credits) 
The role of play in cognitive development, and its impact on formal learning processes are explored through experiential interactions. A comprehensive review of current research in applied learning and its concomitant influence on reading, linguistic development, intelligence, and the integration of consciousness serve as the framework for epistemological inquiry. Program participants explore selected in-depth theories in Consciousness Studies as connecting elements for viewing self-initiated changes in human processes. 
 
EDU523 – A Constructivist’s Approach to Knowing and Creating Meaning (3 credits) The continuous modification and transmutation of cognitive frameworks are considered fundamental learning processes that evolve from personal epistemological structures. Knowledge and the constructivist perspectives upon which they are interpreted are examined relative to their impact on developmental learning. The construction of personal frameworks for effecting understanding are considered critical to the interpretation of experience and the creation of meaning. Reflection, cyclical re- evaluation of knowing, and the creation of meaning are analyzed as manifestations of the epistemological phenomena. 
 
EDU524 – Learning Theories and Applications (3 credits) 
Dewey, Piaget, Inhelder, and other theoretical contributors enlightened this study of the theoretical frameworks that facilitate the development of a personal epistemology through the validation of authentic learning experiences. Program participants learn to analyze the cognitive processes that unify learning across multiple disciplines and frame content in context as precursors to discovering the elements of personal reality. Transdisciplinary perspectives are analyzed in their multiple interactions, and the evolutionary nature of knowing is revealed as a product of cognitive dissonance resolution. 
 
EDU525 – Self, Community, Culture: Advanced Study of Interactive Learning Fields (3 credits) 
Various perceptions of being, from simple terms of “spirit, mind, and body” to expressions of complex interactions, are examined as they contribute to the development of human reality. Culture, in its multidimensional sense, is taken as the substrate upon which humans generate personal and cultural meaning. The interactions inherent in these elements give rise to the indefinable human characteristics of intentionality, creativity, continuity, and imagery. The element of flow, a central focus, is considered as representational of peak experience, and exemplifies a Maslowian perspective. 
The art of holistic education is a means whereby self; community and culture can be integrated in meaningful and interactive learning fields. These fields involve responding authentically to the needs of children, curriculum, and culture without rigidly adhering to a specific methodology. 
 
EDU526 – Holistic Approaches to Learning and Curriculum Design (3 credits) 
Holistic thinking has its philosophical roots embedded in the Romantic and 
Transcendentalist movements of the nineteenth century. The visionaries who served to break ground in this fertile epistemological territory include Jean Jacques Rousseau, Johann Pestalozzi, Maria Montessori, John Dewey and Rudolf Steiner. Holistic philosophical thinking was further enriched in the mid-20th century with ideas emerging from an eclectic group of thinkers including process philosopher Alfred North 
Whitehead, system theorist Ludwig von Bertalanffy, archetypal psychologist Carl Jung, and integral philosopher Sri Aurobindo. The paradigm-shifting frameworks of physicists 
David Bohm and Fritjof Capra, futurist Ervin Laszlo, biologists Rupert Sheldrake, Humberto Maturana and Francisco Varela, Eco philosopher Henryk Skolimowski, chemist Ilya Prigogine, and transpersonal psychologist Ken Wilber have furthered the study of holistic thinking. What the founding fathers believed then, is imminently central to our need today. Specifically, contemporary education needs to embrace a new epistemological framework other than that which has guided it over the past three hundred years. 
 
EDU540 – Introduction to Educational Technology (3 credits) 
This course focuses on the skills necessary for 21st Century educators to effectively evaluate and use digital resources and technological tools to support teaching and learning. Topics will include an examination of technology integration techniques such as the use of the Internet, personal productivity software, instructional software, and electronic assessment methods. Trends in educational technology will be surveyed and discussed. Course competencies are based on ISTE National Education Technology Standards for Teachers (NETS*T). 
 

EDU541 – Tools for Technology Integration into the Curriculum (3 credits) 
This course teaches basic concepts and skills in the operation and use of educational technology tools including, but not limited to, pad computers, touch screens, smart boards, scanners, projectors, digital cameras, video cameras, and document cameras. Course competencies are based on ISTE National Education Technology Standards for Teachers (NETS*T). 
 
EDU542 – Applied Technology Applications for Curriculum and Instruction (3 credits) This course provides an awareness, understanding, and appreciation of the use of application and curriculum-related software in the teaching and learning process. It includes the use of application programs and instructional software in selection, evaluation, and correlation with the adopted West Virginia Content Standards and Outcomes (CSO’s). Course competencies are based on ISTE National Education Technology Standards for Teachers (NETS*T). 
 
EDU544 – Technology Competencies for Curriculum Leaders (3 credits) 
This course is structured to develop policies, awareness, procedures, services, and skills essential to educational technology. It will assist educators in solving immediate educational problems, as well as in fostering growth and understanding of future technology needs. 
EDU570 – Curriculum Development (3 credits) 
This course is specifically designed to provide students with the ability to analyze, evaluate, and understand the foundations of teaching and learning and how they relate to curriculum development. Course topics include the history, principles, philosophy, and concepts that underlie curriculum and instructional practices in organizational learning communities. Course assignments focus on activities that relate the students’ learning experiences related to theories and the larger contexts of diverse organizational perspectives.
 
EDU580 – Analysis and Evaluation of Instruction (3 credits) 
This course is specifically designed to provide students with the ability to analyze and evaluate instruction, and how sound, research-based pedagogy facilitates learning at any level. Students will use a data driven analysis of instruction to evaluate their own practice and the practice of others. This includes analysis and application of professional standards and organizational goals utilizing observed examples of instructional delivery. An action research project will be developed and proposed utilizing a professional setting as a laboratory to evaluate practices. 
 
EDU640 | EDU740 – Public School Finance and Administrative Applications (3 credits) This course is designed to provide students with the skills necessary for effective school business leadership. The course addresses the concepts of school finance including the economics of public education, issues of equity, sources of revenue, types of expenditures, court cases related to school funding, the development of school finance systems, and administering the school budget as well as the local, state, and federal roles in the school funding process. Students will apply concepts and policies to real situations using case studies and field experiences to demonstrate the skills needed to administer and manage educational programs and finances at various programmatic levels. Prerequisites: Advanced Standing. 
 
EDU652 | EDU752 – School, District, and Community Leadership (3 credits) 
This course focuses on the skills necessary for 21st Century administrators to work effectively with diverse educational stakeholders. The skills will include being able to collaborate and develop teamwork; assess and evaluate faculty and staff; resolve conflict; create and maintain positive work environments that support learning; establish staff development priorities; developing and implementing a strategic plan; use communication and technology skills effectively; define goals and outcomes; global awareness; and manage the change process to achieve efficiency and effectiveness for the 21st Century. It will provide students with the opportunities to study concepts of school, district, and community culture and explore the resources for school program enhancement. It will focus on evaluation of communication structures that develop between school districts and community, media, community involvement in schools and forces of leadership. EDU 652 includes 30 hours of fieldwork (15 building and 15 district) to support course activities. Prerequisites: Advanced Standing. 
EDU655 – Professional Development Leadership (3 credits) 
This course is designed to provide students with the skills necessary to facilitate school/district professional development goals, and programs to realize those goals. Professional development is crucial to the realization of a school and district vision/mission. 21st Century teaching and learning requires educational leaders at all levels to possess the most current, research-based knowledge of pedagogy, resources, and the learning community at large. These goals should ultimately lead to greater 
EDU664 | EDU764 – Professional Practices of the Principal (3 credits) 
The goal of this clinical experience is to provide the prospective school administrator with the skills and proficiencies necessary to administer and manage public school programs PreK-Adult. The intern will spend a minimum of 130 clock hours engaged in activities appropriate to school building leadership embedded within the field experiences of the internship. The field experiences consist of 7 mandated projects aligned with the Components of the NELP (2018) Standards for school building level leadership. Activities can include any other requirements negotiated between the intern and the site supervisor. An action research project is required to facilitate the practice of data-based decisions to support the work of a building principal with a goal of helping all students learn. 
Candidates will develop an electronic portfolio built upon the 7 projects with summaries demonstrating performance of the building level NELP Standards. Prerequisites: Advanced Standing. 
 
EDU670 | EDU770 – Instructional Leadership (3 credits) 
This course focuses on development of skills in instructional leadership including recognizing and utilizing research-based best practices, the role of standards and assessment at the school and district level, and the development and implementation of professional development and staff evaluation processes to support learning for all students. Emphasis is placed on regular and special needs students, learning styles, special education regulations, and West Virginia’s Content Standards and Outcomes (CSO). Design of staff development activities and evaluation of instructional resources and technology for education are emphasized. EDU 670 includes 30 hours of fieldwork (15 building and 15 district) to support course activities. Prerequisites: Advanced Standing. 

EDU674 | EDU774 – Professional Practices of the District Supervisor (3 credits) 
The goal of this clinical experience is to provide the prospective administrator with the skills and proficiencies necessary for general supervision within a PreK-12 school district. The intern will spend a minimum of 100 clock hours in activities appropriate to district supervisor leadership embedded within the field experiences of the internship. The field experiences consist of 7 mandated projects aligned with the Components of the NELP (2018) Standards for school district level leadership. Activities can include any other requirements negotiated between the intern and the site supervisor. An action research project is required to facilitate the practice of data-based decisions to support the work of a district supervisor with a goal of helping all students learn. Candidates will develop an electronic portfolio built upon the 7 projects with summaries demonstrating performance of the district level NELP Standards. Prerequisites: Advanced Standing. 
 
EDU680 | EDU780 – School Law and Administrative Applications (3 credits) 
This course provides the prospective educational leader with a foundation in school law and the skills necessary to administer and manage a school or district. Topics include student and teacher rights, issues of due process, religious issues in schools, personnel and contracts, persons with disabilities, First Amendment rights, liability and torts, supervision, legislative processes, and related matters. Students will apply concepts and policies to real situations using case studies and field experiences to demonstrate the skills needed to administer and manage educational programs fairly, ethically, equitably, and legally. Prerequisites: Advanced Standing. 
 
EDU684 | EDU784 – Professional Practices of the Superintendent (3 credits) 
The goal of this clinical experience is to provide the prospective administrator with the skills and proficiencies necessary for leadership within a PreK-12 school district in the role of the superintendent. The intern will spend a minimum of 100 clock hours in activities appropriate to school district management embedded within the field experiences of the internship. The field experiences of the internship consist of six mandated projects aligned with the Components of the NELP (2018) Standards for school district leadership. Activities can include any other requirements negotiated between the intern and the site supervisor. A Final Reflection project is required to facilitate the practice of data-based decisions to support the work of a district superintendent with a goal of helping all students learn. Candidates will develop an electronic portfolio built upon the seven projects with summaries demonstrating performance of district level NELP Standards. Prerequisites: Advanced Standing. 
 
EDU691 | EDU791 – Technology Competencies for Educational Leaders (3 credits) This course, based on ISTE’s National Educational Technology Standards for Administrators, aims to improve the technology competencies of future educational leaders and to prepare them to be more efficient practitioners and facilitators of 21st century learning. It addresses areas such as technology competencies for administrators, technology planning, productivity tools, technology-enhanced learning environments, school administration systems, communication tools, and appropriate use of technology. 
Prerequisites: Advanced Standing. 

ENG101 – Written English (3 credits) 
This course concentrates on the concepts of focus, organization and development of expository writing and rhetoric. It introduces students to research skills and writing, and to the use of technology in composition. This is a basic introduction to the development of skills necessary for effective written communication. Instruction centers in reading exemplary fiction and nonfiction prose and in writing expository and analytical paragraphs and essays. 
 
ENG102 – Written English 2 (3 credits) 
Building on the content and skills presented and mastered in ENG101 Written English, this course emphasizes objective, public forms of exposition including description, analysis, and argument, the conventions of formal written English and basic scholarly research skills. The development of creative, critical, and analytical thinking skills are emphasized. Prerequisite: ENG101. 
ENG200 – Research and Writing for Effective Communication (3 credits) 
This course concentrates on developing students’ abilities to conduct meaningful research and to produce analytical written works within the contexts of academic and technical writing. Special attention will be paid to clarity and directness for effective communication as well as editing to improve clarity of expression, which is a fundamental skill. Students use a problem-solving model of goal and audience analysis in producing reports, organizational correspondence, and instructional media. The focus is on developing research skills and strategies for the final research document, using the provided Salem manual of style. Building on prior English courses’ content, ENG200 requires both expository writing and research-based argumentative writing in the production of a well- crafted research report. Prerequisite: ENG102. 
 
ENG203 – Multicultural Literature (3 credits) 
Living in the twenty-first century is living in a multicultural world. Reading and discussing literature from many different cultures helps students develop an understanding of those cultures. To this end, students in this class will read and discuss the works of authors from many different cultures, past and present, in the light of background information about the lives of those authors and about their cultures. A focus will include selected readings in the canon of Western world literature, both ancient and modern and other genres of the writers of the Appalachian region. While many West Virginia writers will be studied, works from the entire region and other regional writers from American sub-cultures, like Appalachia, will be included. Prerequisite: ENG102. 
 
ENG206 – Structural Grammar: The English Language (3 credits) 
An introduction to language, its structure in the mind and its use in the United States. Students study the history and structure of the English language, with focus on its development, syntax, and grammar, including focus on style, usage, punctuation, and expression. A survey of multiple grammars (e.g., reference, mental, pedagogical, performance, theoretical, traditional, transformational, and universal) is included. An intense study of traditional grammar and the effective teaching of that grammar will be modeled and prescripted during this course. Prerequisite: ENG200. 
 
ENG220 – American Literature (3 credits) 
This course provides a historical introduction and survey of literature and its emergence and the variety of genres in America from its beginnings to mid-nineteenth century through a selected list of readings. Native American works both written and pictographs will be studied. Prerequisite: ENG102. 
 
ENG222 – American Literature 2 (3 credits) 
This course extends the historical introduction and survey of literature in America via its emerging culture from mid-nineteenth century to present through a selected list of readings. Literary elements as contained in poetry and drama emerging from development of cultural changes will include music and rap and theater productions in the public arena, as literary selections. Prerequisite: ENG102. 
 
ENG230 – British Literature (3 credits) 
This course offers a historical introduction and survey of literature in Great Britain from Middle Ages through the eighteenth century from a selected list of readings. Students will focus on selected plays and poetry from works of William Shakespeare’s body of work and their origins, and then analyze the impact of his work on subsequent works and cultural contexts in both British and other English literatures. Prerequisite: ENG102. 
 
ENG232 – British Literature 2 (3 credits) 
This course extends the historical introduction and survey of literature in Great Britain from the late eighteenth century to the present from a selected list of readings. Students will study literature and literary forms and genres that include but are not limited to the emergence of women writers and relevant cultural reflections in the various literary selections. Prerequisite: ENG230. 
 
ENG300 – Cultural Impact on Language Learning (3 credits) 
This course concentrates on the study of the impact of student diversity in the processes of reading, writing, and viewing. Course topics include cultural connections and impact (including ethnicity, race, language, culture, gender, and ability), non-native English influences on English language learning, the use and adaptation of native language structures to support English language learning, and analysis of English language arts curriculum. This course addresses the current trends of culture in contemporary genres of print, non-print media, and film to reflect the newly accepted and supported perceptions of writers who are marginally ground-breaking in their expressions and in their preservation of culture through their written and non-print works. Prerequisite: ENG200. 
ENG304 – Non-Western World Literature (3 credits) 
This course provides a selection of readings representing a survey of non-Western world literature, ancient and modern. The focus is on the traditions that are common to cultures and the different perspectives that inform cultural understandings and reflect values clarification in the 21ST century perspective. Prerequisite: ENG300. 
 


ENG306 – Drama and Poetry (3 credits) 
This course is a broad-based survey of world drama including Western and non-western traditional works. Plays are studied from the conceptual beginnings of ancient sources as instruction and entertainment through the evolution and development up to contemporary sources in the scope of this course. Poetry is studied from earliest Western and non- Western sources of ancient, recorded sources through the evolution and development up to contemporary sources in the scope of this course. Drama and poetry are studied in the development of both genres and critical analyses of each. Prerequisite: ENG304. 
 
ENG308 – Short Story and Novel (3 credits) 
This course is a broad-based survey of world novels including Western and non-western traditional works. The novel as concept and novels as varieties are studied from the conceptual beginnings and the works of ancient sources through the evolution and development up to contemporary sources in the scope of this course. The short story is studied from earliest Western and non-Western origins from ancient, recorded sources through the evolution and development up to contemporary sources in the scope of this course. Novel and Short Story are studied in the development of both genres and critical analyses of each. Prerequisite: ENG306. 
 
ENG377A – Materials and Methods of Teaching Language Arts (3 credits) 
This course focuses on the teaching of grammar and composition in the language arts classroom. Structure of composition and structure of language as teaching pedagogy and the materials to affect such pedagogy are studied. 
 
ENG377B – Materials and Methods of Teaching Language Arts 2 (3 credits) 
This course focuses on the teaching of literature and analysis of literature and other arts in the language arts classroom. Demonstrate in-depth knowledge of and use of varied teaching applications for works from a variety of genres and cultures, works by female authors, and works by authors of color. Contextual influences on teaching language arts are both a project and process of this course. Prepares prospective teachers of literature with an in-depth knowledge of and use of varied teaching applications for works from a variety of genres and cultures, works by female authors, works by authors of color with deference to the contextual influences on teaching language arts. 
 
FIN343 – International Finance & Banking (3 credits) 
International Finance & Banking provides students with a conceptual framework that helps them in financial decision-making in an international context. This will be a logical extension of the introductory finance course but builds and extends the valuation concepts and analytical framework to account for the unique dimensions of international finance. 
FIN344 – Corporate Finance (3 credits) 
This upper-level course provides a foundation and conceptual framework for understanding the principles of finance as they apply to business management, planning, and operations. Topics include net present value, time value of money, risk, and valuation. 
 
FIN345 – Corporate Finance 2 (3 credits) 
This upper-level course is a continuation of FIN344. It delves into the details of financial management and the analytic frameworks for financial planning and decision-making. Topics include constrained resource allocation, capital budgeting, long-term financial planning, debt and equity, purchase vs. lease decisions, and financial ratio analysis. Prerequisite: FIN344. 
 
FIN430 – Investment Analysis (3 credits) 
This course introduces the basic concepts of investment analysis. It focuses on analyses of the economic considerations (micro and macro), environment, social, and governmental or regulatory factors that are relevant to informed decision- making. Topics include an overview of function and efficiency of securities markets; the relationships between risk and return; types of investments, including various securities and options; and valuation. 
 
FIN435 – Capital Markets (3 credits) 
This course exams the range of financial markets, focusing on the linkage between savings and investment to create wealth. It establishes the basics for understanding portfolio management. 
 
FIN440 – Portfolio Management (3 credits) 
The development and application of the principles of modern portfolio theory is fundamental to the management of financial assets. Topics include the concepts of efficiency, risk, diversification, and capital rationing, as well as portfolio construction, portfolio revision, and use of types of financial assets in effective portfolio management. 
 
FIN445 – Real Estate Finance & Investment (3 credits) 
Investment in real estate, both by individuals and companies, is a major component of the national economy. Topics include financing residential, commercial, and industrial real estate, as well as tools and techniques of real estate development. The course will analyze financial instruments, institutions, and markets; the role of government agencies in making investment decisions; and pros and cons of real estate as an investment. 
FIN510 – Advanced Corporate Finance (3 credits) 
This course focuses on making effective financial decisions in private and public sector organizations. The overarching theme is making decisions that maximize stakeholder value within the constraints of budgets. The course addresses the foundation concepts that are critical to effective decision-making by chief financial offers. Topics include managing cash flows, leveraging debt, conducting cost-benefit analyses, identifying appropriate investments, futures and options. Prerequisite: Advanced Standing. 
 
FIN525 – Applied Portfolio Theory (3 credits) 
This course focuses on the tools and techniques associated with the effective management of financial assets. Case studies are used to guide the investigation of a wide range of topics, including securities markets, efficient market and portfolio theories, asset pricing models, and the valuation of stocks and bonds. Prerequisite: Advanced Standing. 
 
FIN540 – Financial Analysis (3 credits) 
This course provides a framework utilizing accounting principles, financial statements, and Securities and Exchange Commission reports (such as 10-K) to evaluate the current and future financial stability and potential growth of an organization. Topics include estimating requirements, establishing debt policies, obtaining long-term financing, preparing capital budgets, and establishing the comparative value of competing investments. Pro forma models and case studies are used to help inform decision-making. Prerequisite: Advanced Standing. 
 
FIN560 – Financial Management (3 credits) 
The course covers major issues facing a manager, including financial statement analysis; discounted cash flow analysis, time value of money; risk-return trade-off, valuation of financial assets, capital budgeting, financial planning, cost of capital; long-term financing through debt and equity, and the analysis of various financial models to improve existing short- and long-term asset management. Emphasis is placed on the importance of resource management in decision-making and the role of leverage and its impact on the enterprise. 
 
FNA202 – World Music (3 credits)
This course seeks to elucidate the social, historical, philosophical, and religious significance of popular music of the world. First, there is an examination of popular music in America and England. Then there is an analysis of the appropriation of this popular music by many cultures around the world. 
 
FNA203 – World Art (3 credits)
This course is an introduction to the visual arts for students. The course examines the history of the visual arts and the roles art plays in cultures around the world. 
 
HCM605 – Introduction to Health Care Management & Operations (3 credits) 
This course provides a graduate-level survey of health care management that focuses on the core competencies required of nursing managers in health care organizations. Topics include market assessment, determination of health needs, systems analysis, business planning, leadership, law and government policy, marketing and sales, and strategic management. The course includes a comparison of the international approaches to health care delivery systems and management. 
 
HCM610 – Health Care Law, Policy and Ethics (3 credits) 
This course explores the role of law, policy, and ethics in health care management. Topics include moral reasoning; ethical theories applied to health care policy at the local, state, and federal levels; and resolving ethical conflicts. The course focuses on the application of moral reasoning to decision-making in the modern health care environment. 
 
HCM620 – Organizational Behavior & HR Management in Health Care (3 credits) This course examines the strategic importance of human resource management in Health Care Management. Topics include the functional areas that define the core of human resource management. The evolution of human resource management strategies and practices is analyzed in terms of enhancing organizational performance. Legal and ethical factors affecting human resource management in Health Care Management are examined. 
 
HCM625 – Health Care Planning, Promotion and Evaluation (3 credits) 
This course presents methods for the identification of public health needs that call for intervention, the development of programs to meet these needs, and methods of evaluation to assess the effectiveness, efficiency, and equity of these interventions. Topics include models for program planning in health promotion; needs assessment; measurement, sampling, and data collection; community organizing and community building; marketing programs; evaluation approaches, frameworks, and designs; and data analysis and reporting. 

HED120 – Core Concepts of Personal Health (3 credits) 
Designed to acquaint students with concepts of health including total fitness and evaluation, nutrition, stress management, and current health topics. 
HED130 – Consumer Health (3 credits) 
This course is designed to acquaint students with general concepts, strategies, methods and sources of information in selecting health products and services. 

HED270 – Categorical School Health Topics (3 credits) 
This course is designed to allow students to make an in-depth study of crucial health issues. The content will vary to include issues related to mental health, specific health problems (psychological and psychosocial), or health care ethics. 
 
HED301 – Administration of School Health Programs (3 credits) 
A study of school health programs, health instruction, health services and those specific areas of health relating to the needs of early childhood and elementary school children. 
 
HED377A – Materials and Methods of Health Education (3 credits) | HED377B – Materials and Methods of Health Education 2 (3 credits) 
The series of courses is designed to prepare students to teach health at the elementary (PreK-4), middle school (5-8) and the secondary school classroom and beyond (9-Adult). Topics discussed will be curriculum planning and organizing, methodology, instructional techniques, and evaluation. In addition, the selection and use of age and developmentally appropriate materials will be a topic of discussion and practice, including significant fieldwork experience. Prerequisite: Completion of Level I. 
HHP600 – Human Movement Science (3 credits) 
This course is designed for students to improve their knowledge of human movement and build a foundation for understanding how the human body operates. This course will guide fitness professionals along a journey with the anatomy of human body and applications of physical performance and optimal movement. This course will prepare students both in theory and application of the structures of the human body. 
 
HHP601 – Biomechanics for sport and Exercise (3 credits) 
This course is designed for students to improve their understanding of how mechanical principles influence human motion during physical activity (ex., principles concerning force and corresponding motion). This course will place a special emphasis on the biomechanics utilized in exercise and sport. Key concepts that will be covered during this course include force, torque, linear and angular motion (kinematics), fluid mechanics, and some mechanical characteristics of muscles, bones, and connective tissue. 
 
HHP602 – Fundamentals of Nutrition Science (3 credits) 
This course is intended to provide an integrated overview of the physiological requirements and functions of macronutrients and the major vitamins and minerals that are determinants of health and human performance. This course will include topics such as diseases in human populations, dietary sources, intake levels, physiological role, and requirement of major nutrients. Students will develop macronutrient profiles for optimal success for both general health and human performance. Students will acquire the knowledge and skills to utilize nutritional recommendations to develop nutritional goals for individuals following nutritional best practices. 
 
HHP603 – Exercise and Sport Psychology (3 credits) 
This course is designed to provide students the opportunity to be exposed to sport/physical activity from the standpoint of psychological aspects contributing to exercise and coaching techniques, associated psychological outcomes of participation. In this course, students will examine the psychological theories and research and their application to the sport/physical activity-related affect, behaviors and cognitions of participants as well as the individual and environmental factors which shape these outcomes. 
 
HHP604 – Movement & Skill Acquisition (3 credits) 
This course is designed to help students improve their understanding of the principles that relate to human movement and skill acquisition. Specific areas of focus in motor learning will cover information processing, decision making, skilled behavior, and movement planning. Students will become familiar with the current trends and practices in various settings to enhance motor learning and athletic performance. Students will learn the various ways to enhance motor learning strategies to enhance natural movement results with people of all abilities. 
HHP605 – Advanced Exercise Physiology (3 credits) 
This course is designed to increase the student’s knowledge and understanding about human physiology and the adaptations that occur during exercise. This course will provide information on the importance of understanding how the body responds to acute and chronic exercise for all fitness professionals including athletic trainers, Strength coaches, personal trainers, and exercise Clinicians. This course will cover topics in bioenergetics, circulatory, respiratory and neuromuscular responses to the physical stress of exercise. The course will focus on describing and exploring how the body responds to exercise and athletic performance, providing theory and application with all physical and chemical processes. 
 
HHP606 – Research Methods in Health and Human Performance/Capstone (3 credits) This course is designed to help students improve their abilities in becoming consumers of research in the field of health and human performance. Students will be given the opportunity to develop their knowledge and skills of the applied theories behind exercise science research methods. An emphasis will be placed on the evaluation process of research methods, statistical analysis, mock proposals, and data analysis and data evaluation. Students will be responsible for putting theory into application to submit a capstone project. 
 
HHP610 – Sports Needs Analysis, Movement Screening & Assessment (3 credits) This course is designed to help students to improve their abilities to as a strength and conditioning coach to provide a rich and deeper evaluation into the physical needs of athletes. This course will offer an evaluation of the general demands and performance characteristics of athletes to enhance team and individual goals. An analysis of the physiological basis for sports performance will allow students the ability to improve their coaching through increased physical capacity, reduced fatigue, and a decrease in the likelihood of injury and illness. 
 
HHP611 – Scientific foundations of Strength & Conditioning (NSCA CSCS Prep course 1) (3 credits) 
This course provides the student with an in-depth look at the foundational principles and general approach in all facets for Strength and Conditioning. This course will focus on concepts provided by the National Strength and Conditioning Association (NSCA) including anatomy and physiology, biomechanics, nutrition, exercise technique, program design, organization, and administration, testing and evaluation. This course will include key theories, concepts, and scientific principles of strength training and conditioning as well as their direct application to athletic competition and performance. This course will prepare students to sit for the national accredited Certified Strength and Conditioning Specialist (CSCS) certification exam. 

HHP612 – Applied Strength & Conditioning principles (NSCA Prep course 2) (3 credits) This course will address the application and implementation of the concepts provided by the National Strength and Conditioning Association. The concepts that will be applied will emphasize strength, power, speed, agility, endurance, and hypertrophy training methods, focusing primarily on periodization of programs. This course will allow students the opportunity to provide in-depth discussions and application of the components of the physiological principles and strength assessments as they relate to resistance training and sport. This course will prepare students to sit for the national accredited Certified Strength and Conditioning Specialist (CSCS) certification exam. 
 
HHP613 – Power and Speed for Sports Performance (NASE) (3 credits) 
This course addresses the development of speed, power, and the ability to change direction for all athletes to enhance performance. Students will identify concepts relating to how an athlete can generate high force output and ground contact force in a short amount of time. The ability to create maximum performance in these sport components requires power. In this class power in the form of Olympic lifting will be a large area of focus for students looking to become a strength and conditioning professional. This course will also provide students with advanced knowledge regarding the topics of speed, agility, quickness, (SAQ) and endurance training. Advanced topics of training will be explored, including body mechanics, sports training protocols, and program design. Detailed sport performance training programs, focused on SAQ and endurance, will be covered. Students will be prepared to sit for the Speed and Explosion Specialist Certification (CSC) offered by the National Association of Speed and Explosion (NASE). 
 
HHP614 – Practical Internship Experience (3 credits) 
In this course, students will engage in a practical internship experience. The internship must be conducted at an approved site with the student receiving hands-on experience working with athletes and providing programming and industry standards under strength and conditioning fitness and wellness. 
HHP615 – Preparation for Health and Fitness Professionals (NSCA CPT Prep Course 1) (3 credits) 
In this course students will analyze and develop an individualized approach to clients in fitness and wellness. Students will assess, motivate, educate and learn how to train clients regarding their personal health and fitness needs. Students will learn the methodology to design safe and effective exercise programs, provide guidance to help clients achieve their personal health/fitness goals, and respond appropriately in emergency situations. The concepts and methodology that will be utilized in this class will be based on the 
National Strength and Conditioning Associations Certified Personal (NSCA-CPT) Training philosophy. This course will prepare students with the theory to sit for the NSCA’s CPT exam. 
 
HHP616 – Functional Assessment and Exercise prescription (NSCA Prep Course 2) (3 credits) 
This course will provide the student with a comprehensive overview of the physiological responses of the human body to exercise and training in healthy populations as well as the practical application and knowledge necessary to conduct and interpret a wide variety of screenings and exercise tests commonly used in clinical practice. Additionally, students will be able to design training programs for all populations based on fitness assessments, appropriate exercise selection for healthy adults, as well as clients with special considerations. This course will assist students to prepare for the National Strength and Conditioning Association’s Certified Personal Training Exam. The concepts and methodology that will be utilized in this class will be based on the National Strength and Conditioning Associations Certified Personal (NSCA-CPT) Training philosophy. 
 
HHP617 – Fitness & Wellness Business Marketing Strategies (3 credits) 
In this course the student will analyze, design, and implement marketing campaigns unique to the health and fitness industries by learning about the history, evolution, issues, and reviewing actual campaigns. In addition, the role of marketing within each of the fitness and wellness industries will be evaluated. A greater understanding of issues in health & fitness marketing through an analysis of local and international company's marketing strategies will be completed. The course will also cover health behavior change models, barriers to adopting healthier lifestyles and methods for encouraging the adoptions of healthy lifestyles. Students will use marketing concepts to design a marketing campaign. 
 
HHP618 – Current Topics in Fitness & Wellness (3 credits) 
In this course students will explore relevant issues facing society regarding exercise, fitness, athletic performance, kinematic movement, motor development, and biomechanical analysis. The current body of research along with current social trends will be investigated by the student. Students will analyze and synthesize current and relevant topics and offer solutions to benefit exercise science research and related industries. 

HHP619 – Corporate Wellness & Fitness (3 credits) 
In this course, students will examine the tenets of developing a successful worksite wellness program, introducing key concepts, resources and tools needed to foster positive financial implications for developing a corporate wellness program. Topics include rising health care costs, developing a prevention strategy for better health, changing corporate culture to reduce risk factors, relating job satisfaction to corporate wellness and using innovation to enhance health measures. Students will demonstrate learning by building a business case for investing in the health of a company’s employees by initiating a corporate wellness program. 
 
HHP620 – Foundations of Sport Coaching (3 credits) 
This course will introduce methods of skill instruction, basic teaching strategies, and pedagogy in the area of sport coaching. Students will learn how to properly organize drills, plan safe and effective practices, present age-appropriate sport skills to athletes at the youth, middle and high school levels, as well as intercollegiate and professional athletics, and evaluate motor-skill development of athletes. This course will also explore psychomotor, cognitive, and affective development and performance of athletes in school, community, and professional settings. Students in this course will have the opportunity to teach cooperatively with peers and will also be presented with opportunities to teach micro-lessons in their area of sport interest. 
 
HHP621 – Psychology of Coaching (3 credits) 
The goal of this course is to provide students with an overview of the psychology of coaching sport and participating in sport and exercise. Basic tenets of psychology of the individual as well as group behavior will be reviewed. Topics will include motivation, stress, communication, group cohesion/dynamics, leadership, reinforcement, and feedback as they relate to the sport & exercise context. 
 
HHP623 – Analysis of Sport Performance for Coaches (3 credits) 
In this course, students will examine key principles of research methods, evaluation, and planning to identify and organize instruments for data analysis and formulation of a Program Evaluation Strategy. Knowledge and skills needed to initiate a well-designed evaluation of their team, program, and self (as a coach) will be explored. Students will examine integration of Program Evaluation Strategy and enhance students’ understanding of their own coaching through reflection to facilitate coach development. 
 
HHP624 – Ethics and Diversity in Sport Coaching (3 credits) 
In this course, students will examine the philosophical exploration in the recognition, analysis, and implementation of ethical thought and the ethical decision-making process within the multivalued contexts of the sports industry, particularly as it relates to sport coaching and sport administration. Students will assess and appraise concepts of equality, equity, fairness, and diversity among all participants of sport and the management and application of those concepts within sport coaching. 
 
HHP625 – Contemporary Issues in Sport Coaching (3 credits) 
The course will examine current trends and issues in athletics, sport and coaching. The concepts will be explored from both theoretical and applied perspectives. Through a series of presentations, readings, videos, internet activities and discussions, students will gain insight into a variety of timely topics as they relate to coaching education, coaching management, and coaching applications. 
HIS125 – World Civilization (3 credits) 
The course is a survey of selected civilizations spanning the globe. Topics range from the origin and development of early civilizations through the modern era. Special attention will be given to the political, economic, social, and cultural forces still existing today. 
HIS153 – U.S. History (3 credits) 
From the European colonization of North America to independence, the Civil War, and the industrial revolution, this course analyzes the social, economic, and political forces behind the United States’ rise to world power by the latter half of the nineteenth century. 
 
HIS154 – U.S. History 2 (3 credits) 
By describing the domestic and foreign policies of the United States throughout the twentieth century, the course analyzes the reasons behind its rise to superpower status by the turn of the twenty-first century. At the same time, it sketches the causes and effects behind the labor, African American, and women’s right movements. 
HIS205 – History of Organized Crime (3 credits) 
This course presents an historical view of organized crime and its development to the present day. Current trends and organizations are explored along with the criminal justice system’s response to include RICO and other strategies. The traditional view of organized crime is updated to include modern developments in criminal justice thinking, investigation and response. 
 
HIS210 – World Geography (3 credits) 
Global geography and climate and their influences upon the economy, political structure, and general culture of the nations of the world. 
 
HIS305 – American Foreign Policy (3 credits) 
This course examines American foreign policy since World War II. The course addresses the critical decisions and debates that have shaped the course of America’s diplomatic interaction with the World. A consistent finding is that change is the only constant in U.S. policymaking. The focus of foreign policy historically is the interaction with sovereign States that control territory and resources around the World. Increasingly, American foreign policy both creates and reacts to these changes with decisions that inevitably are affected by varying domestic and international political and bureaucratic processes. 
 
IHI500 – Foundations of Integrative Health and Healing (3 credits) 
This course introduces students to the diversity of health and healing philosophies and traditions and explores their historical context, foundational principles, and practices. Students gain an understanding of the ancient healing arts, conventional/allopathic medicine model, evidence-based medicine, naturopathic and functional medicine, and holistic healing modalities through presentations that engage in reflective learning and dialogue. This course allows for the exploration and integration of diverse perspectives on the body, health, and wellness and explores a holistic, systems-based philosophical framework in the context of health and healing. 
 
IHI501 – Mind-Body Medicine (3 credits) 
Mind-body medicine recognizes that the human mind and body are interconnected, especially in the context of health and wellness. In this course, students explore the biological basis of the mind-body connection through the lens of psychoneuroimmunology (PNI), which provides evidence of the effects of complementary and alternative medicine modalities. Develop a functional understanding of integrative healing techniques such as mindfulness, meditation, biofeedback, breathing, guided imagery, hypnosis, journaling, art, music, neuro-linguistic programming (NLP), and emotional freedom technique (EFT). 
 
IHI502 – Integrative Nutrition (3 credits) 
Nutrition is integral to an integrative medicine model and is extended into the 
Hippocratic principle of food as medicine. Holistic health also evolves within a broader context of ecological and cultural practices that do not separate individual health from the health of the whole system. In this course, students explore this “whole systems” model, examining the impact of ecological, agricultural, dietary, and cultural practices as it relates to health and nutrition. The whole system's approach to diet and nutrition includes understanding environmental impacts on water purity, air quality, food acquisition, and quality and the interconnected network of food, environment, and health. In this course, students will immerse themselves in a whole-food approach to nutrition and learn about the diverse lenses with which to view diets and nutrition and individual dietary needs. Students will also be exposed to evidence-based therapeutic diets and their origins and impact on health and disease. 
 
IHI504 – Energy-Based Therapeutic Healing (3 credits) 
Energy-based therapeutic procedures are increasingly included within mainstream integrative healthcare (IHC) services. This course examines the principles and practices of energy therapies including acupuncture, magnets, Reiki, and Therapeutic touch. 
Students will discover the philosophy and practice of whole-body systems such as Ayurveda, homeopathy, naturopathy, aromatherapy, and Chinese/oriental medicine. The role of ecotherapy in integrative health and healing will be explored. 
 
IHI505 – Fundamentals of Plant-Based Medicine (3 credits) 
Medicinal plants & herbs have had a rich history. Recent research supports the use of herbs in pain management, as well as a holistic approach to allergies, depression, anxiety, and heart disease. This course provides a foundation for the study of plant medicine. We explore a variety of elements shaping the modern practice of herbal medicine in the United States today. This course reviews traditional rationale for herbal use as well as the foundational modern sciences that support a contemporary evidence-informed perspective. Students will review the identification and use of medicinal plants by chemical structure and physiological effect and the challenge to current research paradigms posed by complex plant medicines. 
 
IHI506 – Perspectives on Wellness (3 credits) 
The human body has an innate ability to maintain its own health when provided with the appropriate amounts and types of healing signals. When harmful signals are removed and healing signals are enhanced, cells, tissues, and organ systems can create healthy outcomes. This program will provide a framework for measuring and monitoring health resiliency. Students will learn how to help clients (re)build health resiliency and maintain long-term wellbeing. This program is predicated on identifying the four markers of wellbeing: nutritional, physical, emotional and environmental wellbeing. In this course, you will learn more about these markers of wellbeing, how to test for them, and interventions to improve your patients’ vitality and wellbeing. 
IHI507 – Immune Foundations and GI Health (3 credits) 
Immune health is a prime topic in integrative health and healing. The health of the immune system determines the onset of acute infections, and whether those infections evolve into chronic diseases. While in the past most illnesses were infectious or acute, after generations of lifestyle changes, chronic diseases have now become a substantial obstacle to wellness. The acute care model cannot address these complicated illnesses. This course will identify and assess the triggers of immune dysfunction on both the acute and chronic levels. The clinical case studies will highlight management guidelines for natural solutions to help reverse the processes associated with immune dysfunction from allergies to autoimmune conditions. 
 
IHI508 – Stress and Pain Recovery (3 credits) 
From a physiological perspective, stress and its effects on our physiology is a major underlying cause of several mental and physical health problems. Among its causes, chronic musculoskeletal pain and dysfunction can perpetuate the stress response and serve as an indicator of deeper health issues. This course will examine the 4 key stressors and the impact that these stressors have on the stress response system (HPA axis). Students will utilize a testing/decision tree, protocols for each of the three stages of HPA (Hypothalamus-Pituitary-Adrenal) axis dysfunction, as well as protocols and lifestyle recommendations addressing each of the four key stressors that exacerbate HPA axis dysfunction and how to help clients identify which of these stressors is contributing most to their symptoms. Although frequently ignored, pain is a warning of things to come if one continues down the path of poor lifestyle decisions. Pain is often the result of any physiological dysfunction. This course will examine a pain recovery program focused on avoiding chronic pain. In this course, you will learn more about the Healing Matrix, how to test for chronic pain, and interventions to improve your patients’ painful musculoskeletal conditions. This program is designed to implement a multimodal approach to pain called The Healing Matrix in which nutritional, physical, and psychological aspects are used to treat pain simultaneously. 

IHI509 – Integrative Health Coaching I 
An integrative health coach uses concepts drawn from psychology, behavior change, and life coaching fields to improve the health and well-being of individuals who want overcome obstacles to maintain healthy habits for life. The 1st course in the Integrative Health Coach program provides basic competency in core coaching skills for working with a diverse set of clients or patients, with a specific focus on integrative health coaching. Students will foster self-awareness and self-discovery through exploration of mindfulness and personal growth to create an integrative approach to wellness. Students will practice facilitation of client self-awareness and coaching for behavior modification strategies through the application of wellness assessment tools and motivational skills. The program is designed to serve and educate professionals interested in coaching others to optimal health and wellness. Students will develop the skills necessary to build the coaching relationship from start to finish. (Note: this course will require 3 hours of synchronous class time per week) 
IHI510 – Integrative Health Coaching II 
This 2nd course in the certificate program allows the student to review core coaching skills learned in IHI509 health and wellness coaching. Students will build on the core competencies to develop more advanced coaching techniques. They will examine advanced topics in health and wellness. Students will collaborate on client assessment and program planning for health and wellness clients. This course will offer additional insights into the scope of practice, collaborating with other healthcare professionals, as well as business and marketing practices. Students will have the opportunity to work with clients to build their coaching portfolios. (Note: this course will require 3 hours of synchronous class time per week) 
 
IHI550 – Transformative Learning and Communication (3 credits) 
In this eight-week course, students hone their abilities to ask powerful questions, engage in active listening, and communicate directly while gaining insights through intuition and mindfulness. Students will explore awareness, at all levels of the self, including thoughts, feelings, sensations, and actions. Students will develop their own capacity for self-awareness and learn to facilitate this awareness in others. Students will examine methods of effective communication to improve the performance of others. 

IHI551 – Consciousness, Beliefs, Intentions, and Traditions (3 credits – 8 week course) 
Students will examine the nature of beliefs, intentions, and traditions to assess how they can be empowering in manifesting a vision and life purpose. Students explore paradigms of consciousness and beliefs that have influenced the development of civilizations, the nature of a participatory universe, and the core principles of transformation within the context of psychological and psycho-spiritual development. Students will learn techniques for cultivating mindfulness and presence considering these beliefs and traditions. 


IHI552 – Transpersonal Psychology (3 credits) 
Students will review the historical, philosophical, and theoretical foundations of 
Transpersonal Psychology. As a field within scientific psychology, Transpersonal Psychology centers its focus on the spiritual aspects of life. Students will focus on the transpersonal studies at the individual level found in the individual’s biological, cultural, social, and wider contexts. Students will be introduced to the variety of ways that researchers have explored Transpersonal Psychology over the last 40 years. 

IHI553 – Stages and States of Consciousness (3 credits) 
Students are introduced to human consciousness and the nature of its evolutionary transformation. Models of adult development and transformation continue to evolve, and students learn the foundations and current issues of this discussion. Students study methods and theories of catalyzing and tracking their own developmental growth and that of others. 
IT110 – IT Essentials (3 credits) 
This course will emphasize systems hardware, components, and peripheral devices. Concepts and principles common to all computing devices are studied. Additional hardware, such as printers, modems, and expansion cards are included. Basic network technology concepts and technologies are covered. This course provides students hands- on experience via simulation, where students actively participate in virtual labs to enhance their understanding and practical knowledge. 
 
IT130 – Fundamentals of Computer Graphics (3 credits) 
This course studies the principles underlying the generation and display of 3D computer graphics. Topics include geometric modelling, 3D viewing and projection, lighting and shading, color, and the use of one or more technologies and packages such as Blender, Open GL, and Adobe Photoshop. Advanced topics might include ray tracing, radiosity, texture- and bump-mapping, the mathematics of curves and surfaces, volumetric rendering, and animation. Students will use software to produce 3D computer images.  (Cross-listed as CS130)
 
IT150 – Computer Programming (3 credits) 
An introduction to the theory and practice of computer programming, the emphasis of this course is on techniques of program development within the object-oriented paradigm. Topics include control structures, objects, classes, inheritance, simple data structures, and basic concepts of software development. (Cross-listed as CS150)

IT151 – Computer Programming 2 (3 credits) 
This course is a continuation of IT150 Computer Programming. It reinforces and extends the introduction to the theory and practice of computer programming. Prerequisite: IT150 or equivalent. Prerequisite: IT150. 
 
IT202 – Internet Publishing (3 credits) 
A comprehensive examination of the Internet. Special emphasis on maintaining access to updated information crucial to daily business operations, e-mail, search engines, news groups and the latest software will be examined. This course will develop the webmaster skills necessary to design and maintain an Internet presence for business use. 
IT310 – Database Architectures (3 credits) 
This course provides coverage of concepts and skills required to implement an efficient database. Topics include relational algebra, entity-relationship and relational models, database design, query languages such as SQL, query processing, system architectures and storage and file structures. (Cross-listed as CS310)
 
IT323 – Methods of Software Development (3 credits) 
This course continues the study of software development by focusing on the methods of software design, development, and verification - the skills beyond fluency in a particular language which are necessary for developing large, reliable programs. Topics include object-oriented design, the use of APIs, and testing and verification. Techniques common in modern software development will be studied. Specific techniques may include GUIs and event-driven programming, multi-threading, client-server networking, fault-tolerant computing, stream programming, and security. 
IT405 – Computer Forensics (3 credits) 
This course is designed to help students learn the internal components of a computer and then to expound on that knowledge to understand how digital evidence is collected and analyzed for presentation to the court system. Intrusion detection and prevention systems will be discussed along with proxies and firewall implementation and conducting vulnerability assessments. Both volatile and persistent data will be examined, and the student will investigate ways to capture it. In addition, the effect of system administration duties will be discussed related to the admissibility of evidence in court. The legal aspects of data collection will be examined as the techniques used will determine whether evidence is admissible. 
 
IT409 – Basic Networking (3 credits) 
This course provides students with the fundamentals of networking, while exposing students to simulations that lead to practical experience, and opportunities to fully understand Systems Development Life Cycle. The course teaches networking based on application, covering networking concepts within the context of network environments that students may encounter in their daily lives, from small office and home office (SOHO) networking to more complex enterprise and theoretical networking models. This course helps prepare students for entry-level career opportunities, continuing education, and certifications.  (Cross-listed as CS409).

IT410 – Enterprise Networking (3 credits) 
This course will provide students with a general knowledge of networking theory, while giving students practical experience, and opportunities for career exploration and soft- skills development. The course teaches networking based on application, covering networking concepts within the context of network environments that students may encounter in their daily lives – from small office corporate office (WAN-LAN) networking to more complex enterprise and theoretical networking models. This course helps prepare students for entry-level career opportunities, continuing education, and globally- recognized Cisco CCENT and CCNA certifications. 



	IT420 – Information Systems Security (3 credits) 
This course introduces computer network security. Students successfully completing this course will be able to evaluate works in academic and commercial security and will have rudimentary skills in security research. The course begins with the tutorial of the basic elements of cryptography, cryptanalysis, and system security, and continues by covering several seminal papers and monographs on a wide range of security areas. (Cross-listed as CS420)  
 
IT425 – Advanced Cybersecurity (3 credits) 
This advanced course on cybersecurity will educate students about implementing information security systems properly. The course will detail a layered approach and skillset relative to protecting institutional systems from malware, viruses, cybercrime, social engineering or phishing, web threats such as denial of service attacks, hacking and the protection of physical and intellectual assets. Students diagnose and monitor system events and conduct vulnerability assessments and design firewalls for the protection of institution networks. 
 
IT445 – IT Project Management (3 credits) 
This course focuses on the methods, tools, and techniques of managing projects, with a special emphasis on IT projects. Like all projects, IT project management must address initiating, planning, executing, controlling, and closing. An overarching task of project management is communicating clearly and frequently with stakeholders. This is especially true with the rapid pace, technical complexity, and frequent change requests that are experienced by most IT project managers. The topics covered in this course align with the Project Management Institute’s PMBOK® Guide.  (Cross-listed as CS445)

	IT495 – Information Technology Internship (3 credits) 
Students engage in practical experience with an agency or organization specific to their field of study. Students will apply outcomes acquired through the IT program courses. Students will work under the direct supervision of a senior-level professional at an approved agency, organization, or company. Students will be enrolled in a distance education course and will be required to submit assignments and documents that demonstrate what has been learned through the internship. 
 
IT499 – Senior Capstone Project (3 credits) 
This course is designed for the student to demonstrate and integrate the knowledge, skills, and abilities gained in the program. The student will analyze a set of selected it case studies from a variety of organizations and provide individual and cross-case syntheses and evaluations to support IT management decision-making. Prerequisite: Senior standing. (Cross-listed as CS499)
IT500 – Business Foundations and Operations (3 credits) 
This survey course provides a fundamental understanding of the concepts of providing IT services to enable goods production and service delivery. Topics include economics of competitive markets, competitive analysis, strategic planning, and logistics. The course will cover capacity planning, workflow analysis, quality control, and quality assurance. 
 


IT510 – Information Technology and Project Management (3 credits) 
This course covers the concepts and skills necessary for managers to plan, propose projects, secure resources, budget, and lead project teams. Students will analyze competitive advantages gained by using project management processes compared to ad hoc methods and to other organizational strategies. Topics covered by the course include the major elements of the Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK) as defined by the Project Management Institute. 
 
IT520 – Risk Assessment and Management (3 credits) 
This course presents students with analytic techniques and tools used in quantitative and qualitative risk assessment and management. Students will perform basic risk analyses with specific applications to project management. Students will apply and evaluate comprehensive Probabilistic Risk Assessments (PRA) studies using logic models to find risk values. Students will determine uncertainties and develop methods for propagating them through appropriate risk assessment model. 
 
IT530 – Disaster Recovery and Continuity Planning (3 credits) 
This course focuses on preparing for, reacting to and recovering from events that threaten the security of information and information resources, or that threaten to disrupt critical business functions. Students examine various levels of threats to an organization’s information assets and critical business functions, as well as develop policies, procedures and plans to address them. Technology specific to thwarting disruption and to supporting recovery is covered as well. 

	IT550 – Systems Security (3 credits) 
This course covers the policy foundations of information security. Topics covered in the course include such areas as access control, information security policy and personnel management along with an evaluation of information systems security policies currently in use. Students will evaluate information systems security measures currently in use domestically and internationally and synthesize a comprehensive information security plan. 
 
IT610 – Information Systems Security Professional (3 credits) 
This course information systems security within the ITU-T framework. Students successfully completing this course will understand the role and importance of international standards for cybersecurity (X.509) AND be able to evaluate works in academic and commercial security. Topics include cryptography, cryptanalysis, and system security evaluation. 
IT620 – Intrusion Detection and Prevention (3 credits) 
This course focuses on the current trends in cybersecurity using case studies to help students develop skills in risk management, incident response and mitigation practices. Topics will include cybersecurity issues in government, business, and infrastructure protection. Students will evaluate the current state of the field to determine weaknesses and propose avenues for improved protection. 
 


IT630 – Security Policies and Procedures (3 credits) 
This course on cybersecurity will educate students about implementing information security systems properly. The course will detail a layered approach and skillset relative to protecting institutional systems from malware, viruses, cybercrime, social engineering or phishing, web threats such as denial of service attacks, hacking and the protection of physical and intellectual assets. 
 
IT640 – Database Management (3 credits) 
The database management course will provide an overview of database management including the analysis of database requirements, design and implementation of databases that enable organizations to take advantage of information systems for competitive advantage. Specifically, the course covers topics in database environment and development processes, database design and implementation, database administration and management. The course also includes topics in data integration and data quality as well as relational versus NoSQL databases.  

IT650 – Business Intelligence, Data Analytics, and Decision-Support Systems (3 credits) This course introduces business intelligence and analytics, defined as the extensive use of data, statistical and quantitative analysis, exploratory and predictive models, and fact- based management to drive decisions and actions. The development and use of data warehouses and data marts, and the application of selected data (including text and graphics) mining techniques to business decision making is illustrated. Students actively participate in the delivery of the course through case and project presentations. 
 
IT660 – Big Data Analysis for Security (3 credits) 
The student will learn the importance of information security as it relates to data and the applications that are employed within data science. The overall goal of expertise in this subject area is to identify sources of risk, to mitigate security risks, and to be able to take proactive steps to prevent breaches of security (ie, loss or modification of client information or fraud) within the enterprise. The student will understand how to better represent data to users through a process of data visualization and associated tools. 
 
IT670 – Predictive Analytics (3 credits) 
The analytic tools used to analyze big data (multi-terabyte to petabyte) involve discovering patterns within unstructured information that enable professionals to create more robust and efficient decision making capabilities for the enterprise. While conventional Business Intelligence is valuable to business, oftentimes the tools used to discover and define patterns using big data analytics prove to be a pathway to even more valuable business information. In dealing with big data, the student examines diverse sources of public data as well as data silos within the organization. 

IT699 – Enterprise Networking (Capstone Project) (3 credits) 
The Capstone Project is designed to evaluate the students learning in core and specialization courses that a student has completed in MSIT program of studies. This course is designed for the student to demonstrate and integrate the knowledge, skills, and abilities gained in the program. 

 
ITM510 – Database Management (3 credits) 
The database management course will provide an overview of database management including the analysis of database requirements, design, and implementation of databases, and building and using data-driven decision support systems that enable organizations to take advantage of information systems for competitive advantage. Specifically, the course covers topics in database environment and development processes, database design and implementation, database administration and management. The course also includes topics in data integration and data quality as well as databases for World Wide Web and the Internet. 
 
ITM680 – Business Intelligence, Data Analytics, and Decision-Support Systems (3 credits) This course introduces business intelligence and analytics, defined as the extensive use of data, statistical and quantitative analysis, exploratory and predictive models, and fact- based management to drive decisions and actions. The development and use of data warehouses and data marts, and the application of selected data (including text and web) mining techniques to business decision making is illustrated. Students actively participate in the delivery of the course through case and project presentations. 
 
ITM750 – Database Technology (3 credits) 
This course will focus on the most important aspects to database development. Topics discussed are critical for the practical success of database professionals. The subject matter further facilitates learning with illustrations that clarify important concepts and new media resources that make some of the more challenging material more engaging. Additional attention is directed toward the areas undergoing rapid change due to improved managerial practices, database design tools and methodologies, and database technology. 
 
ITM775 – Managing Information and Decision Support Systems (3 credits) 
This course focuses on technologies collectively called analytics (or business analytics) and the fundamental methods, techniques, and software used to design and develop these systems. Students gain inspiration from examples of organizations that have employed analytics to make decisions, while leveraging the resources of a companion website. Given these tools and insight students will be able to make informed business decisions. 
 
ITM780 – Telecommunications & Global Network Management (3 credits) 
This course will emphasize concepts (including the OSI 7-layer model, data transmission methods, medium access, link control, and connections management), network applications (including electronic mail, file transfer, distributed computing, window systems), and network management tools (including OSI and Internet management frameworks). Students will be able to evaluate network communication primitives and undertake more complex protocol engineering and network management tasks and evaluate complex telecommunications technologies in enterprise environment. 
MAT109 – College Algebra (3 credits) 
This course provides a review of the real number system and algebraic expression, linear and quadratic equations, and inequalities, complex numbers, graphing, polynomial and rational functions, exponential and logarithmic functions, systems of equations, and basic matrix algebra.  This course meets part of the mathematics general education requirement for graduation.

MAT125 – College Mathematics (3 credits) 
This course reviews mathematical operations involving fractions and decimals. Topics include percent, ratios, proportions, U.S., and metric measurements, sets and logic, counting systems, cryptography, graphs, finance, the Pythagorean Theorem, perimeter, area, and volume. It introduces algebraic concepts using expressions and equations. Problem solving, estimation, and reasoning skills are taught. Practical applications are integrated throughout the course.  
MAT140 – Statistics (3 credits) 
This course provides development of basic concepts in statistics including descriptive statistics, probability, central tendency measures, distributions, correlation, hypothesis testing, and regression. Prerequisite: MAT125. 
 
MGT210 – Principles of Management (3 credits) 
This course is an introduction to the management of organizations. It studies the processes and functions of management, the structures and designs of business organizations, and special topics, such as the social responsibility of business, international perspectives in management. 
 
MGT212 – Introduction to Heath Care Management (3 credits) 
This course introduces health care management, including planning, evaluation, budgeting, marketing, government and regulatory oversight, and managing change. 
MGT222 – Human Resources Management (3 credits) 
A study of the principles and techniques of manpower management in organizations; controversies and processes of interaction among labor, management, government, and the public; labor law; and the collective bargaining process as well as an-depth study of HR policies and procedures for talent development in organizations. Case studies are used. 

MGT225 – Legal Aspects of Health Care Management (3 credits) 
This course provides an examination of the laws and regulations that govern health care facilities and programs. Topics include privacy, rights, protections, and liability. 
 
MGT310 – Economics & Health Care Finance (3 credits) 
This course covers economics, accounting, and finance principles applied to health care. Topics include budgeting, capital expenditures, and evaluating the effectiveness of investments in terms of quality of health care delivery and financial returns. 
 
MGT361 – Management Information Systems (3 credits) 
This course examines the importance and the role of information management in a business environment. Topics include the concept of organizational information systems, information technology and competitive advantage, information for quality, international management, systems theory, and methodologies. Computer based information, database management, decision support systems, expert systems, and communication are covered. 
 
MGT362 – Operations Management (3 credits) 
The study of operations management focuses attention on how business is conducted daily. Operations management aims to help the company achieve its strategic goals in terms of effectiveness (achieving what is expected) and efficiency (doing so with the least feasible resources). Operations management is distinct from project management in timing and scope. A successful project may devise a new product or process, but at that point the project comes to an end: Projects are time limited. Operations is not time- limited in that, as a going concern, the company plans to continue to operate for the foreseeable future. Fundamental to effectiveness and efficiency is manufacturing or service process design. This topic extends to include facility layout, queueing theory and waiting lines, the theory of constraints, quality control, and quality assurance. Various techniques of planning and delivering quality products and services rely on statistical process controls, which are introduced in the course as well. 
 
MGT363 – Organization Theory (3 credits) 
This course deals with organizations and how they work. It includes recent theoretical advances in the field and how these advances relate to dramatic events currently occurring within real-life organizations. It has an environmental focus and includes strategic considerations. The course explains how organizations formally react to or attempt to influence their environment. It examines an organization's relationship to its environment through a strategic system approach. This course enables students to achieve a perspective for the totality and interconnectedness of environmental and internal organizational components. Prerequisite: Advanced Standing. 
 
MGT410 – Compensation and Benefits Management (3 credits) 
This course focuses on how managers use compensation and benefits to attract, motivate, and retain qualified employees. Topics include economic and behavioral theory and research on pay programs, current approaches to pay-for-performance, and the strategic importance of pay systems in aligning employee behavior with corporate mission and goals. 
 
MGT411 – Employment Law (3 credits) 
This course helps students understand how to identify issues and argue legal positions on human resources, labor, and employment law. Topics include statute and case law, civil rights and equal opportunity, discrimination and harassment, employee protection and privacy, and labor relations. 
 
MGT412 – International Human Resources Management (3 credits) 
This course addresses the challenges of human resources management in multinational contexts. Topics include methods of assessing cultural differences, comparisons of the U.S. with major trade partners, how cultural differences affect workplace interactions, strategies for building multinational teams, and cultural intelligence. 
 
MGT424 – International Business Management (3 credits) 
An examination of management problems arising out of the operation of a multinational enterprise. Topics include the installation of operations (capital investment) in foreign countries; alternative forms of entry and organization including licensing, acquisitions and joint ventures. Attention is given to organizational structure, strategic decision making, movement of monies, goods, skills, and technology across national borders; barriers to entry; home-host governments; staffing, corporate ethics and social responsibility; and socio-cultural influences that bear on the management of the multinational enterprise. 
 
MGT426 – International Issues in Health Care Management (3 credits) 
This course examines emerging global issues in health care. Topics include comparisons of international delivery systems, differential patient outcomes and quality, privacy, public health, and multicultural considerations. 
 
MGT450 – Special Topics (3 credits) 
This course focuses on timely issues in management including but not limited to organizational theory, global challenges, ethical and legal issues, leadership, human resources, operations, and so forth. This course may be repeated for credit with the approval of the academic advisor. Prerequisite: Faculty approval. 
 
MGT499 – Senior Capstone Project (3 credits) 
This is a capstone course designed to integrate the knowledge gained in the various subject disciplines through the analysis and the interpretation of selected case studies from a variety of organizations. Prerequisite: Senior Standing. 
MGT705 – The Craft of Dissertation Research & Writing (3 Credits) 
This doctoral course establishes the historical context of doctoral studies, the significance of the scientific method as applied to the growth of knowledge, and the essential knowledge, skills, and abilities to become a doctoral graduate. 

MGT707 – Qualitative Research Methods (3 Credits) 
Students in this course will be introduced to qualitative research methods. The course uses interactive and applied techniques to teach knowledge and skills applicable to qualitative research. Students will conduct their own qualitative study. Students will analyze the data collected and present the results of their analysis in a research paper. Students will submit their interview guides and interview transcripts as attachments to their research papers. 
 
MGT710 – Research Methods (3 Credits) 
The course forms a foundation for the Doctor of Business Administration (DBA) researcher, while introducing both quantitative and quantitative analysis tools necessary with professional practice in planning and operating a business. The focus is on practical  application of statistics and data analysis techniques useful in maximizing organizational outcomes. Successful students will become sophisticated designers and consumers of qualitatively-based-research, reports, and communication. Quantitative statistical tests will be also examined. Emphasis is also placed on communicating-statistically-based conclusions to stakeholders who may not have extensive quantitative training. Students will learn how to design a statistically sound research study, including a methodology for their own dissertation research. 
 
MGT712 – Program and Project Evaluation (3 Credits) 
Students in this course become familiar with the program evaluation, including needs assessment, formative research, process evaluation, monitoring of outputs and outcomes, impact assessment, and cost analysis. Students evaluate the design of a conceptual framework which includes the analysis of experimental, quasi-experimental, and non- experimental study designs, including the strengths and limitations of each. 
 
MGT715 – Management as a Behavioral Science (3 Credits) 
Management theory evolved from the behavioral sciences, applying principles of psychology, sociology, anthropology, and economics. This course will examine the contributions of the behavior sciences to management theory and practice and vice versa. 
 
MGT720 – Evolution of Management Thought (3 Credits) 
Managerial thought and practice have a history that extends to the earliest civilizations. Topics include an investigation of how management thinking has reflected changing social, economic, cultural, and political circumstances organizations have faced. Prevailing theories of management from the time of Sun Tzu to the present will be surveyed. 
MGT725 – Current Issues in Leadership (3 Credits) 
Doctoral graduates must be able to think critically, and problem solve with alacrity. This course reviews managerial issues facing today’s organizations. Students will prepare papers analyzing selected issues and drawing consequences that they envision. Special attention is directed to the fundamental tasks of management and the role of businesses in service to the public good. 
MGT750 – Economic and Financial Theory (3 Credits) 
The academic study of economics and finance has developed a corpus of theories that are at the core of modern management practices and business administration. This course will cover advanced topics in microeconomics, macroeconomics, and finance that affect domestic and international firms. The original works of Nobel Prize winners will be analyzed in depth as they apply to the private and public sectors. 
 
MGT755 – Strategy and Business Policy (3 credits) 
Students in this course analyze and evaluate business policies. Students will also evaluate strategy formulation, planning, process, and strategy implementation. The course assumes a global perspective when examining strategy and policy. The research areas of business policy are detailed and studied. 
MGT760 – Ethics (3 credits) 
This course will focus on building decision-making skills so that readers can arrive at and defend personal or company decisions in an objective, and convincing manner. Students will understand and examine decision-making in business with respect to ethics. This course develops ethical theory with enough rigor and precision to help students deal with the complexity of real-life situations. This subject also provides students an opportunity to build expertise through its numerous exercises and real-world dilemmas. 
 
MGT765 – Legal and Regulatory Environment of Business (3 credits) 
This course will examine the legal and regulatory environment of business, emphasizing why legal duties are placed on the business community and how managers should appropriately respond to them. The subject matter covers legal institutions, constitutional law, trade law and Uniform Commercial Code. 
 
MGT775 – Multivariate Research Methods and Trend Analysis (3 credits) 
This course will examine business research methods and the forecasting course provides essential knowledge about forecasting methods and budgeting and forecasting training. Using these methods helps you predict how prices will change, what inventory you will need, and the size of your staff required to run your operation efficiently. 
 
MGT776 – Mixed Methods Research (3 credits) 
This course covers foundational principles for applying statistical methods to support making evidence-based decisions. The course involves basic overviews of inferential statistics, both parametric and nonparametric. Students will analyze data samples, report results, and utilize the results to draw conclusions and make persuasive arguments. 
MGT777 – Analytical Case Study Methods (3 credits) 
This course focuses on the dissertation research using mixed methods and case studies. The fundamental tools of program evaluation are included as well as integrating qualitative and quantitative methods to draw reasonable, defensible, rich findings. The importance of analytical case studies (as opposed to anecdotal case studies) is highlighted as a practical means of conducting in-depth business research without utilizing designed laboratory or field experiments. 
 
MGT790 – Organizational Development & Change Management (3 credits) 
This course is based on management theory evolved from the behavioral sciences, applying principles of psychology, sociology, anthropology, and economics. This course will examine the contributions of the behavior sciences to management theory and practice and vice versa. 
 
MGT795 – Organizational Systems Theory (3 credits) 
This course will emphasize a systems theory approach to organizations which likens the enterprise to an organism with interdependent parts, each with its own specific function and interrelated responsibilities. The system may be the whole organization, a division, department or team; but whether the whole or a part, it is important for the organizational development practitioner to understand how the system operates, and the relationship the parts of the organization have. 
MGT796 – Leadership in Global and Multicultural Organizations (3 credits) 
This course will challenge students to analyze the difference between strategic planning, thinking and implementation. Students will choose strategies the make sense for business and then to develop a strategic plan. Students design plans with customers and competition in mind. 
 

MGT800 – Dissertation Proposal (Introduction, Committee Development, Literature 
Review, Methodology Planning) (3 credits) 
Concurrent with the second semester block of DBA core courses, the focus for this phase is to develop a Dissertation Proposal with the guidance of a Mentor or team of Mentors (aka a student-named dissertation committee). This dissertation proposal will comprise the first three chapters of the typical five-chapter dissertation. It will demonstrate the student’s expertise in his or her DBA journey. Students will continue to refine and add to their reading list covering the major relevant topics and an in-depth, specialized reading list relevant to their specific research question(s). The critical work product is a formal written proposal for dissertation research. This proposal must include a clear statement of a problem worthy of the time, effort, and other resources necessary to research the topic and survey the relevant literature. The proposal must specify the research methods, data collection, and data analysis techniques in detail. The methods to be employed must be appropriate, reliable, and appropriate for the measures taken. The minimum requirement is three (3) credits; however, additional time and credits may be necessary depending on the student’s choice. 
 
MGT805 – Introduction to Dissertation Research (Purpose, Topic Selection, Academic Writing, and Literature Review) (3 credits) 
Concurrent with the first semester block of DBA core courses, including the MGT705 – The Craft of Dissertation Research & Writing, the new doctoral students will be immersed in the significance of original academic contribution to the learning community via one’s own dissertation project. Students will be challenged to identify and find their own passion and doctoral purpose, when selecting a topic for potential investigation. Students will build a general reading list covering the major relevant topics and an in- depth, specialized reading list relevant to their specific research question(s). The MGT800 course reinforces the principles of scholarly and academic writing, and the demonstration and the development of the project’s literature review. Prerequisite – Concurrent enrollment in the MGT705 course 
 
MGT810 – Dissertation Research 1 (IRB Petition and Approval) (3 credits) 
Prior to any discussion, interview, survey, and/or interaction with other human subjects, there must be assurances that ethical considerations and protocols are followed as mandated by governmental regulations, and reinforced and approved by the Salem University’s Office of Human Subjects Protection (OHSP). Concurrent with the third semester block of DBA core courses, the DBA student will formally petition for approval to begin his or her original research. In a multi-phased approach, the student will complete and submit the Salem University Human Subject Research Determination Form (Salem Form #001) into the Office of Human Subjects Protection. Determination will be made as to whether the research will involve interaction with other human subjects. When necessary, the student will then develop and submit the Salem University Template for Human Subjects Protection Protocol (Salem Form #002). Upon receipt and confirmation of its completeness and accuracy, the OHSP will invoke the Institutional Review Board (IRB) committee to formally evaluate the merits of the research, with focus on the ethical protection of all potential survey participants. Only after receiving approval from the IRB, can the candidate begin his or her research involving other human subjects. Prerequisite – MGT805 
 
MGT820 – Dissertation Research 2 (Comprehensive Examination, Investigation and 
Documenting the Findings) (3 credits) 
After completing all of the core DBA courses (3 semesters, 45 credit hours), the student is now poised to demonstrate proficiency through the DBA Comprehensive Examination. After successfully meeting this requirement, the DBA candidate’s final challenge is the completion, presentation, and defense of the original contribution, most often in the form of the dissertation project. The final phase of the DBA is original research to contribute to the field’s body of knowledge. Working closely with their Mentors (dissertation committee), students conduct their research project and develop their dissertation, achieving the highest levels of scholarship. The dissertation must include original research that is focused either on expanding the methodological scope of the content area, developing new theories, or confirming theoretic models. Research methods that may be employed include, but are not limited to, field experiments, surveys, and case studies. The Dissertation is the final scholarly product of the program. This document must complete the proposed research study, presenting detailed results and analyses. The dissertation must present a careful synthesis and evaluation of the work done and the findings obtained. All claims must be warranted, and limitations admitted. Suggestions for future research in the field that build on the instant research are required to demonstrate the fruitfulness of this research. Prerequisite MGT810 
 
MGT830 – Dissertation Research 3 (Defense and Publication) (3 credits). 
An oral examination of the candidate will be conducted by the dissertation committee. This defense is limited to 90 minutes, and will be open to the University, its Administration, and all other interested parties. Public notice will precede the session. The committee may approve the dissertation or request modifications and the opportunity to re-evaluate the final document. The dissertation must be delivered to the committee at least 30 days prior to the scheduled defense. It is expected to be ready for publication in camera-ready or desktop publishing format (300 DPI commercial printing). The candidate must repeat this process until the dissertation approved by a majority of the committee. The title of the dissertation is limited to 60 characters. The title will be recorded on the students’ transcripts. After the dissertation is approved by the committee on behalf of the faculty, the student must arrange for two bound copies of the final document to be provided to the Salem University Library. In addition, the student must provide one copy in electronic format. Salem will work closely with students to gain publication of the work in a scholarly journal or presentation at a professional conference or meeting, as appropriate. 
 
MKT231 – Principles of Marketing (3 credits) 
This course presents basic marketing concepts, principles, and functions. Topics include the analysis of activities through which business firms direct the flow of their goods and services to consumers. 
 
MKT431 – International Marketing (3 credits) 
Analysis of marketing opportunities in international markets. Examination of the cultural, social, political, economic, and legal environment differences. Management styles and negotiating by and with foreign countries. Export promotion and technical transactions of international business: market research, pricing, development, distribution, and promotions. The role of multinational corporations. 
 
MKT530 – Marketing Management (3 credits) 
This course studies the marketplace and the role of marketing in an organization. Students will learn about the influence of the marketplace and the environment, the process of marketing decision-making, design, and use of the organization’s marketing. 
 
MSN505 – Theoretical Basis & Role Development for Advanced Nursing (3 credits) This course extends the student’s knowledge of nursing theory and other disciplines as a foundation for advanced nursing with individuals and groups in an increasingly global, multicultural society. Roles, responsibilities, and trends in professional nursing are explored, and socialization into the role of advanced practice nurse is emphasized. Interdisciplinary collaboration and relationship building are integral parts of this course. 
 
MSN510 – Advanced Research, Inquiry, and Evidence-Based Practice (3 credits) This course focuses on research processes as a foundation for evidence-based practice. There is an emphasis on inquiry within the framework of the scientific method to solve problems and make decisions in nursing. Topics include quality management and outcomes evaluation. 

MSN515	Health Care Policy, Law and Ethics (3 credits) 
This course surveys current and emerging influences of the law, legislative and regulatory processes, and ethical issues on health care and nursing practice. Health care delivery models, as well as new federal and state laws, including the Affordable Care Act are discussed. Students analyze legal, political, and ethical issues, and examine personal and professional values as they affect legal, political and ethical choices. Case studies are used to integrate ethics with personal and legal accountability, and to encourage reflection on connections between law, policy, and ethics. 
 
MSN520 – Leadership in Health Care Environments (3 credits) 
This course integrates theoretical and practical knowledge of leadership to prepare students to manage the delivery of nursing and health care services across the spectrum of health care environments. Practical communications, problem solving, and team building skills are emphasized. Topics include initiating and maintaining effective working relationships; respectful communication; delegation; conflict resolution, and negotiation. 
 
MSN525 – Health Care Informatics and Technology (3 credits) 
This course explores the important uses of health information systems in relation to organization functioning, nursing practice, and patient care. Topics include systems analysis, database management, data communications, privacy, information security, trends in information technology, e-health and health care at a distance, social networking, e-portfolios, and ergonomics. 
 
MSN550 – Organizational Behavior and Workforce Management (3 credits) This course provides a survey of strategic workforce management in health care organizations. Organizational culture and concepts of conflict and change management are discussed in terms of enhancing organizational performance. The role of the nurse administrator in developing and sustaining relationships with employees and other healthcare providers is addressed. Employee recruiting, hiring, motivating, evaluating, retaining, and terminating are explored in depth. Additional topics include effective communication strategies and human resource principles. 
 
MSN555 – Finance and Economics for Nursing Leadership (3 credits) 
This course presents business principles of finance and economics in the context of modern health care delivery. Topics include labor markets and competition; market assessment and marketing; revenue and expense analysis; quality improvement; productivity, cost measurement and forecasting; and capital budgeting. Students will examine how health care financing influences access, quality of care and sustainability of the health care system. Applied financial management, management control systems, strategic planning, and staffing are evaluated. 
 
MSN560 – Complex Health Systems Planning and Resource Management (3 credits) This course addresses the role of the nurse administrator as a healthcare systems leader, with an emphasis on planning, managing, and evaluating complex health systems. Course content includes alignment of financial and human resource management practices with an organization’s strategy and mission, as well as nursing standards and practice policies. 
Topics include financial goals and operational efficiency, cost-benefit priorities, organizational pressures, and diversity. 
MSN565 – Population Health Management, Quality Improvement and Safety (3 credits) This course is designed to prepare students with the knowledge and skills necessary to serve in leadership roles to achieve sustainable mitigation, quality improvement and safety through population health management. Planning and preparedness practices that affect the health of individuals, families, and communities are examined. There is an emphasis on accessing, coordinating, and evaluating health options and services that reduce risks, promote optimum health, and lower costs. 
 
MSN570 – Curriculum and Program Development (3 credits) 
This course addresses the principles of curriculum and program development, design, implementation, evaluation, and revision in nursing education. An emphasis is placed on program and curriculum organizing frameworks; development of learning goals, and outcomes; implementation strategies; and the relationship of nursing curriculum to the parent institution’s mission and philosophy. 
MSN575 – Instructional Methods and Strategies in Teaching and Learning (3 credits) This course provides a survey of how people learn, and an examination of traditional and innovative teaching strategies based on learning theories. There is an emphasis on the teaching/learning process in classroom, online, and clinical settings. Students will critique selected instructional methods for course and lesson development, examine factors that influence learning, and explore research findings that support improved teaching and learning. The scholarship of teaching in the role of the nurse educator is discussed throughout the course. 
 
MSN580 – Assessment, Evaluation, and Accreditation in Nursing Education (3 credits) This course focuses on improvement of student learning outcomes through academic assessment, measurement, testing, and evaluation in the classroom, online and in clinical environments. Issues of accreditation, standards of professional nursing practice, and legal/ethical issues are analyzed within the context of program and curriculum development and evaluation. Integral components of this course include current trends in nursing education; differences in instructional assessments; curriculum-based measurement; criterion-referenced and norm-referenced testing; clinical performance evaluation; and the social, ethical, and legal ramifications of testing and evaluation. 
 
MSN585 – Educational Technology (3 credits) 
Technologies such as digital and online teaching, virtual worlds and media environments, computerized testing and evaluation, and simulations are reshaping the learning experience in nursing education. This course provides an overview of current technologies used for instructional design, delivery, and evaluation. The focus is on the appropriate use of current technologies to effectively engage learners and improve the quality of learning experiences in the classroom, clinical and online educational settings. Students explore best practices in learning design in nursing education. 

	MSN599 	Capstone (3 credits) 
For the capstone course, students complete a scholarly project on a significant issue or problem related to nursing administration or nursing education. The project requires the student to systematically search, analyze, and synthesize relevant evidence-based literature, and to formulate useful conclusions and recommendations for future studies. This project is to encourage the application of theories, principles, and processes that students have studied and learned in the program to an actual issue or problem in the professional activities of the nurse administrator or nurse educator. 
This capstone course serves as the culminating experience for students in the Nursing Education and Nursing Administration tracks. Students will complete a scholarly project addressing a significant issue or problem relevant to their advanced practice specialty. The project involves a systematic search, critical analysis, and synthesis of current evidence-based literature, leading to well-supported conclusions and practical recommendations for future study or implementation. Emphasis is placed on the integration and application of theories, principles, and processes studied throughout the MSN program to real-world challenges encountered in the roles of nurse educators or nurse administrators. The capstone project demonstrates the student’s readiness to contribute meaningfully to academic or administrative leadership in nursing practice. 
 
NUR111 – Basic Concepts of Nursing (3 credits) 
This course introduces concepts and theories basic to the art and science of nursing. The individual uniqueness, preferences, beliefs, lifestyles, and cultural influences are integrated throughout the course as a means for understanding how individuals meet their basic needs. Critical & reflective thinking, communication, evidence-based practice, professional responsibility, and the program’s philosophy of nursing are introduced as supporting structures to nursing practice. The campus lab and clinical settings offer practical experiences in the application of principles and skills taught in the theory portion of this class. Students will be expected to demonstrate beginning competency in application of the nursing process to meet the needs of adult patients in a safe, legal, and ethical manner. Prerequisites: Acceptance to NUR Core. 
 
NUR113 Health Assessment for Nursing Practice
		This course provides an introduction to the principles and techniques of health 			assessment across the lifespan. Emphasizing a holistic approach, students will 			develop the foundational skills necessary to perform comprehensive and focused 			health assessments, including obtaining patient history, conducting physical 			examinations, and utilizing critical thinking to interpret findings. Students will 			learn to identify normal and abnormal findings, document assessments accurately, 		and communicate effectively with patients and healthcare teams. Prerequisites: 		Acceptance to NUR Core

NUR115 – Pharmacology and Dosage Calculation (3 credits) 
This course introduces the role of pharmaco-therapeutic agents in the treatment of illness and the promotion, maintenance and restoration of wellness of diverse patients across the lifespan. An emphasis is placed on theories and principles of pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, and pharmaco-genetics which provide a foundation for critical thinking, the application of research findings, and the utilization of the nursing process in the use of pharmaco-therapeutic agents. The focus is on assessment, client education, and evaluation of client outcomes. Upon completion, students should be able to compute dosages and administer medications safely. Prerequisite: NUR111 and NUR113. 
 
NUR121 – Medical-Surgical Nursing 1 (3 credits) 
This course is the first in a two-part series, focusing on health management, illness prevention, cultural considerations, and holistic care for adult patients with selected non-complex acute and chronic health conditions. Areas of study include cardiovascular, respiratory, renal, fluid and electrolyte, and gastrointestinal disorders. The nursing process and evidence-based practice are applied to address the health needs of adults in diverse healthcare settings. Emphasis is placed on the nurse’s role as a care manager, communicator, and collaborator within a multidisciplinary team, highlighting the values of caring, integrity, diversity, and excellence. Laboratory and clinical experiences provide hands-on opportunities for patient care and documentation. (Prerequisites: NUR111, NUR111EL, NUR113, NUR115; Co-requisite: NUR121EL)
NUR121EL Medical-Surgical Nursing 1 Clinical (1 Credit)
· This course is the first of a 2-course sequence. It focuses on health management, prevention of illness, cultural considerations, and holistic care of adult patients experiencing a range of selected, non-complex, acute, and chronic alterations in health including fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base imbalances, as well as respiratory and musculoskeletal system disorders. Rehabilitation concepts for chronic & disabling health problems and end-of-life care are presented. The nursing process and evidence-based information are utilized to meet the health needs of adults in various health care settings. The role of the nurse as a manager of care, communicator, and collaborator, within the context of the multidisciplinary team is emphasized, with a focus on caring, integrity, diversity, and excellence. Lab and clinical settings offer practical experiences in providing and documenting patient care. (Prerequisites: NUR111, NUR111EL, NUR113, NUR115; Co-requisite: NUR121)

This course is the first of a 3-course sequence. It focuses on health management, prevention of illness, cultural considerations, and holistic care of adult patients experiencing a range of selected, non-complex, acute, and chronic alterations in health including fluid, electrolyte and acid-base imbalances, as well as respiratory and musculoskeletal system disorders. Rehabilitation concepts for chronic & disabling health problems and end-of-life care are presented. The nursing process and evidence-based information are utilized to meet the health needs of adults in various health care settings. The role of the nurse as a manager of care, communicator, and collaborator, within the context of the multidisciplinary team is emphasized, with a focus on caring, integrity, diversity and excellence. Lab and clinical settings offer practical experiences in providing and documenting patient care. Prerequisite: NUR115. 

NUR 122 Medical Surgical Nursing 2 (3 Credits)
This course builds on NUR121, focusing on health management, illness prevention, cultural considerations, and holistic care for adult patients with selected non-complex acute and chronic conditions. Key areas of focus include endocrine, neurological, neurosensory, immune and lymphatic, integumentary, hematologic, and reproductive disorders, as well as preoperative, postoperative, and end-of-life care. The nursing process and evidence-based practice are utilized to address the health needs of adults across diverse healthcare settings. The role of the nurse as a care manager within a multidisciplinary team is emphasized, with a focus on caring, integrity, diversity, and excellence. Lab and clinical experiences offer practical opportunities to apply theoretical knowledge and refine essential nursing skills.
(Prerequisites: NUR111, NUR111EL, NUR113, NUR115, NUR121, NUR121EL; Co-requisite: NUR122EL)
NUR122EL Medical Surgical Nursing 2 Clinical (1 Credit)
· This course builds upon previous nursing courses' foundational knowledge and skills, focusing on the advanced principles of medical-surgical nursing care. Students will refine critical thinking, clinical judgment, and technical skills for managing complex acute care conditions. Students will develop proficiency in advanced nursing interventions through hands-on skills, lab sessions, and supervised clinical experiences. Emphasis will be placed on patient-centered care, interdisciplinary collaboration, and the application of evidence-based practice. Clinical rotations will provide opportunities for students to integrate theoretical knowledge with practical application, enhancing confidence in performing comprehensive assessments, medication administration, and prioritization of care for diverse patient populations. By the end of this course, students will demonstrate competence in essential medical-surgical nursing skills, preparing them for entry into professional practice. (Prerequisites: NUR111, NUR111EL, NUR113, NUR115, NUR121, NUR121EL; Co-requisite: NUR12)

NUR122A – Medical-Surgical Nursing 2 (3 credits) 
This course is a continuation of NUR122. It focuses on health management, prevention of illness, cultural considerations, and holistic care of adult patients experiencing a range of selected, non-complex, acute, and chronic alterations in health including disorders of the cardiovascular, GI, Renal/Urinary, and Reproductive Systems. The nursing process and evidence-based information are utilized to meet the health needs of adults in various health care settings. The role of the nurse as a manager of care within the context of the multidisciplinary team is emphasized, with a focus on caring, integrity, diversity and excellence. Lab & clinical settings offer practical experiences in the application of principles and skills taught in the theory portion of this class. Prerequisite: NUR121. (course will be no longer be available effective September 1, 2025)
 
NUR122B – Medical-Surgical Nursing 3 (3 credits) 
This course is a continuation of NUR122A. It focuses on health management, prevention of illness, cultural considerations, and holistic care of adult patients experiencing a range of selected, non-complex, acute, and chronic alterations in health including disorders of the central nervous system, endocrine system, and hematologic system, as well as the eye and ear. The nursing process and evidence-based information are utilized to meet the health needs of adults in various health care settings. The role of the nurse as a manager of care within the context of the multidisciplinary team is emphasized, with a focus on caring, integrity, diversity, and excellence. Lab & clinical settings offer practical experiences in the application of principles & skills taught in the theory portion of this class. Prerequisite: NUR122A. (course will be no longer be available effective September 1, 2025)


 
NUR231 – Maternity & Neonatal Nursing (3 credits) 
This course provides a family centered approach to the care of childbearing families. There is an emphasis on the bio-psycho-social-cultural needs of the family during the phases of pregnancy, birth, and the neonatal period, including abnormal conditions. Legal/ethical, cultural, and educational considerations related to pregnancy, birth and newborn periods are included, with a focus on collaborative care. The nursing process and evidence-based practice serve as the framework for promoting, managing, and maintaining optimal health of pregnant women and their newborns before, during, and after the birthing process. Prerequisite: NUR122B. (will no longer be available effective September 1, 2025)
	
	NUR231 Maternity, Neonatal, and Pediatric Nursing (3 Credits)

Course Description: 
This course provides a comprehensive overview of maternity, neonatal, and pediatric nursing care. Students will explore concepts related to prenatal care, labor, delivery, postpartum, newborn care, and pediatric growth and development. Emphasis is placed on understanding family-centered care, common health conditions, and interventions across these patient populations. Critical thinking and evidence-based practices are integrated to prepare students for effective nursing care in diverse settings.
- Prerequisites:
NUR111, NUR111EL, NUR113, NUR115, NUR121, NUR121EL, NUR122; Co-requisite NUR231EL

NUR231EL Maternity, Neonatal, and Pediatric Nursing Clinical (1 Credit)

 
This clinical course provides hands-on experience in maternal, newborn, and pediatric nursing, emphasizing the application of theoretical concepts to real-world settings. The course focuses on providing patient-centered, culturally competent care, incorporating the nursing process, evidence-based practices, and developmental considerations. Students will develop and refine clinical skills necessary to care for childbearing families, neonates, and children across various stages of health and illness. Key areas of focus include health promotion, family education, safety, legal and ethical considerations, and effective communication with diverse populations. Through collaborative interactions with interdisciplinary teams, students will develop skills in delivering comprehensive nursing care to support the optimal health and well-being of mothers, newborns, and children
- Prerequisites: NUR111, NUR111EL, NUR113, NUR115, NUR121, NUR121EL
Co-requisite: NUR 231

NUR232 – Pediatric Nursing (3 credits) 
This course provides a family centered approach to professional nursing practice for the pediatric patient from the neonate through adolescence. An emphasis is placed on health promotion, acute and chronic health conditions, and rehabilitative needs of children. Students will integrate knowledge of developmental, physiological, psychosocial, cultural, and spiritual care of pediatric patients who are experiencing alterations in health. The nursing process and evidence-based practice serve as the framework for formulating strategies for promoting, managing, and maintaining optimal functioning of the pediatric patient, and for enhancing the strengths of the family unit. Safety, legal & ethical accountability as well as effective communication processes are integrated throughout the course. Prerequisite: NUR122B. (will no longer be available after September 1, 2025)
	
NUR241 – Nursing Care in Mental Health Settings (3 credits) 
This course focuses on concepts related to the nursing care of individuals experiencing alterations in social and psychological functioning. An emphasis is placed on utilizing the nursing process to provide and manage nursing care for individuals with common psychiatric disorders and mental health needs. Therapeutic use of self is presented with a focus on self-awareness, as well as utilization of effective communication techniques, and the role of the nurse in providing patient care in mental health settings. Learning experiences are provided in the clinical setting for students to demonstrate the provision of mental health nursing care. Upon completion, students should be able to apply psychosocial concepts in the care of individuals with psychiatric-mental health needs. Prerequisite: NUR122B. Prerequisites: NUR111, NUR111EL, NUR113, NUR115, NUR121, NUR121EL, NUR122, NUR122EL, NUR231, NUR231EL)
Co-requisite: NUR 241EL
 
NUR241EL Nursing Care in Mental Health Settings Clinical (1 Credit)
This course is the first of a 3-course sequence. It focuses on health management, prevention of illness, cultural considerations, and holistic care of adult patients experiencing a range of selected,
non-complex, acute, and chronic alterations in health including fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base imbalances, as well as respiratory and musculoskeletal system disorders. Rehabilitation concepts for chronic & disabling health problems and end-of-life care are presented. The nursing process and evidence-based information are utilized to meet the health needs of adults in various health care settings. The role of the nurse as a manager of care, communicator, and collaborator, within the context of the multidisciplinary team is emphasized, with a focus on caring, integrity, diversity, and excellence. Lab and clinical settings offer practical experiences in providing and documenting patient care. 
Prerequisites: NUR111, NUR111EL, NUR113, NUR115, NUR121, NUR121EL, NUR122, NUR122EL, NUR231, NUR231EL)
Co-requisite: NUR 241

NUR251 – Advanced Medical-Surgical Nursing 1 (3 credits) 
This course is the first of a 3-course sequence. It provides an expanded focus on alterations in the health of adult patients, including health management, maintenance, and prevention of complex illnesses. There is a focus on critically ill patients with disorders and diseases of the renal system, connective tissue, and immune system. The healthcare delivery system, current issues and trends in health care, as well as complementary and alternative medicine are presented. The nursing process and best practice evidence are utilized to meet the medical and surgical needs of patients across the adult lifespan in various health care settings. The role of the nurse as a manager of care within the context of the multidisciplinary team will be discussed, with a focus on nursing leadership and management, holistic care, as well as the importance of caring, integrity, diversity and excellence. Prerequisite: NUR241. Prerequisites: NUR111, NUR111EL, NUR113, NUR115, NUR121, NUR121EL, NUR122, NUR122EL, NUR231, NUR231EL, NUR241, NUR241EL)
Co-requisite: NUR 251EL


NUR251EL – Advanced Medical-Surgical Nursing 1 Clinical (3 credits)
This clinical and lab companion course is the first in a two-course sequence, offering hands-on practice in the care of adult patients with complex medical and surgical needs. Students will focus on the application of nursing skills and critical thinking to manage critically ill patients with disorders of the renal system, connective tissue, and immune system. Clinical and lab experiences provide opportunities to integrate the nursing process and evidence-based practices in diverse healthcare settings.
Through direct patient care and simulation, students will refine their skills in assessment, intervention, and evaluation while exploring healthcare delivery systems, current trends, and complementary and alternative medicine. Emphasis is placed on developing leadership and management competencies, including prioritization, delegation, and effective communication within a multidisciplinary team. Professional values of caring, integrity, diversity, and excellence will guide students in delivering holistic, high-quality care to adult patients across the lifespan.
Prerequisites: NUR111, NUR111EL, NUR113, NUR115, NUR121, NUR121EL, NUR122, NUR122EL, NUR231, NUR231EL, NUR241, NUR241EL)
Co-requisite: NUR 251


 
	NUR252 Advanced Medical-Surgical Nursing 2 (4 Credits)
This course builds on NUR251. It provides an expanded focus on alterations in health, as well as health management, maintenance and prevention of complex illnesses, there is a focus on critically ill patients with cardiovascular, respiratory, acid-base, gastrointestinal, genitourinary, respiratory, neurological, and musculoskeletal disorders and diseases and emergency patient care. The nursing process and best practice evidence is utilized to meet the medical and surgical needs of patients across the adult lifespan in various health care settings. The role of the nurse as a manager of care within the context of the multidisciplinary team will be discussed, with a focus on nursing leadership and management, holistic care, as well as the importance of caring, integrity, diversity, and excellence.

Prerequisites: NUR111, NUR111EL, NUR113, NUR115, NUR121, NUR121EL, NUR122, NUR122EL, NUR231, NUR231EL, NUR241, NUR251, NUR251EL)
Co-requisite: NUR 252EL

NUR252EL Advanced Medical-Surgical Nursing 2 Clinical (2 Credits)
This clinical and lab companion course builds on the concepts introduced in NUR251 and provides students with hands-on opportunities to apply theoretical knowledge to practice. The course emphasizes the care of critically ill patients across the adult lifespan with complex health conditions, including cardiovascular, respiratory, acid-base, gastrointestinal, genitourinary, neurological, and musculoskeletal disorders, as well as emergency patient care. Students will actively engage in clinical settings and simulation labs to develop and refine skills in assessment, intervention, and evaluation using the nursing process and evidence-based practices. Through patient care experiences and collaboration with the multidisciplinary team, students will develop competencies in holistic care, critical thinking, leadership, and effective communication, integrating core values to provide safe, high-quality care across diverse healthcare environments.
Prerequisites: NUR111, NUR111EL, NUR113, NUR115, NUR121, NUR121EL, NUR122, NUR122EL, NUR231, NUR231EL, NUR241, NUR251, NUR251EL)
Co-requisite: NUR 252



NUR252A – Advanced Medical-Surgical Nursing 2 (3 credits) 
This course builds on NUR251. It provides an expanded focus on alterations in health, as well as health management, maintenance and prevention of complex illnesses, There is a focus on critically ill patients with cardiovascular, respiratory, acid-base, and GI disorders and diseases. The nursing process and best practice evidence is utilized to meet the medical and surgical needs of patients across the adult lifespan in various health care settings. The role of the nurse as a manager of care within the context of the multidisciplinary team will be discussed, with a focus on nursing leadership and management, holistic care, as well as the importance of caring, integrity, diversity, and excellence. Prerequisite: NUR251. 
 
NUR252B – Advanced Medical-Surgical Nursing 3 (3 credits) 
This course builds on NUR252A. It provides an expanded focus on alterations in health, as well as health management, maintenance and prevention of complex illnesses. There is a focus on critically ill patients with respiratory, neurological, and musculoskeletal disorders & diseases, and emergency patient care. The nursing process and evidence- based practice are used to meet the needs of patients across the adult lifespan. The role of the nurse as a manager of care within the context of the multidisciplinary team will be discussed, with a focus on nursing leadership & management, holistic care, as well as the importance of caring, integrity, diversity, and excellence. Prerequisite: NUR252A. 

NUR299 – Nursing Capstone (63 credits)
This course is the culmination of the ADN Program. It is designed to help students transition from student to career entry. Strategies for stress management & coping, and conflict management are examined. Roles & responsibilities of the RN that are anchored to lifelong learning are reiterated, reinforced, and expanded upon, which include: professionalism, communication, collaboration, organization, prioritization, delegation, time management, evidence-based practice, leadership & management, critical & reflective thinking, and quality improvement. The roles of governing boards & nursing organizations are explored, and legal, ethical, and political responsibilities and issues are evaluated. This course requires 72 hours of a precepted clinical practicum that builds on the knowledge gained from previous nursing courses. It allows for the application of theories & concepts associated with nursing leadership, evidence-based practice, and holistic, patient-centered care. A NCLEX-RN® examination review and preparation is included, and a comprehensive examination that must be passed prior to completion of the course. Prerequisite: All prior courses in the ASDN program. (course change effective September 1, 2025)

NUR299 Nursing Capstone (3 Credits)

This course is the culmination of the ASN Program. This 3-credit capstone course is designed to prepare Associate of Science in Nursing (ASN) students for transition into professional nursing practice. The course emphasizes the development of leadership skills, critical thinking, and clinical judgment necessary for managing patient care, collaborating within multidisciplinary teams, and preparation to pass the NCLEX-RN exam.
Students will engage in activities that strengthen their readiness for the NCLEX-RN exam through the integration of ATI resources, including practice assessments, remediation, and comprehensive review modules. Key topics include prioritization, delegation, communication, and strategies to promote safe and effective care delivery.
Through guided learning, students will refine their ability to analyze complex clinical scenarios, enhance test-taking strategies, and develop confidence in their role as entry-level registered nurses. This course serves as the culminating academic and professional preparation for ASN graduates.
Prerequisites: NUR111, NUR111EL, NUR113, NUR115, NUR121, NUR121EL, NUR122, NUR122EL, NUR231, NUR231EL, NUR241, NUR251, NUR251EL)
Co-requisite: NUR252, NUR252EL (must be currently enrolled or have completed to enroll in NUR299 Capstone didactic component)


NUR299EL Nursing Capstone Clinical (3 Credits)
This course is the culmination of the ASN Program. It is designed to help students transition from student to career entry. Strategies for stress management & coping, and conflict management are examined. Roles & responsibilities of the RN that are anchored to lifelong learning are reiterated, reinforced, and expanded upon, which include professionalism, communication, collaboration, organization, prioritization, delegation, time management, evidence-based practice, leadership & management, critical & reflective thinking, and quality improvement. The roles of governing boards & nursing organizations are explored, and legal, ethical, and political responsibilities and issues are evaluated. This course requires 120 hours of a precepted clinical practicum that builds on the knowledge gained from previous nursing courses. It allows for the application of theories & concepts associated with nursing leadership, evidence-based practice, and holistic, patient-centered care. An NCLEX-RN® examination review and preparation is included, and a comprehensive examination must be passed before completion of the course.
Prerequisites: NUR111, NUR111EL, NUR113, NUR115, NUR121, NUR121EL, NUR122, NUR122EL, NUR231, NUR231EL, NUR241, NUR251, NUR251EL, NUR251, NUR252EL, NUR299)
**Must have completed all courses in the ASN degree curriculum to enroll in this course


 
NUR401 – Professional Role Transition (3 credits) 
This course focuses on the changing role of the nursing professional. Topics include the role of the nurse manager and nursing interventions to support clients and their families with acute and long-term health problems. In addition, this course provides a basis for role transition of the registered nurse across the educational continuum and provides opportunity for exploration of the many dimensions of professional nursing. The student considers the multiple roles of the nurse, the conceptual basis for nursing practice, and selected issues facing the profession of nursing. The course includes an introduction to information literacy and writing skills and provides tools for success as an RN to BSN student. Class sessions and course assignments are designed to foster critical, creative, and reflective thinking skills. 
 
NUR402 – Health Assessment (3 credits) 
This course focuses on a holistic approach to health assessment across the life span, including age specific interviewing and assessment techniques, expected findings, as well as assessment accommodations for an increasingly diverse patient population to improve communication and data gathering. Students will have the opportunity to extend and refine their health assessment skills for professional development. There is a focus on patient teaching, health promotion and key concepts of prevention, analysis, and synthesis of data, distinguishing normal findings from developmental deviations and abnormal findings, and accurate documentation of data. Topics include emerging trends and the latest on evidence-based practice, reflecting what is going on in nursing practice today. 
 
NUR403 – Nursing Research (3 credits) 
This course focuses on a comprehensive approach to research concepts and methods. Evidence-based practice is emphasized throughout, with guidelines for evaluating research and applying scientific evidence to practice. Topics include qualitative and quantitative research, appraising and critiquing research, critical thinking and clinical decision-making using research information. Online vignettes are presented with real world applications of nursing research, and sample research reports are provided for students to interpret, evaluate, and apply key concepts that are presented throughout the course. 
 
NUR404 – Legal and Ethical Issues in Nursing and Health Care (3 credits) 
This course provides an overview of ethics in nursing and health care with a focus on legal and ethical concepts, principles, and regulations under which professional nurses practice. Students will explore and analyze current ethical issues that impact the practice of nursing and health care today, and examine concepts, theories, and personal and professional values as they apply to decision-making related to a variety of ethical dilemmas. 
 
NUR405 – Chronic and Complex Health Problems (3 credits) 
This course focuses on care of adult clients with acute and complex health problems. The emphasis of the course is enhancing the critical problem-solving skills necessary for making nursing judgments and providing effective care. Students will focus on understanding the client’s development stage, psychological needs, and cultural issues, in the context of the critical care environment. 
 
NUR406 – Evidence-Based Practice (3 credits) 
This course addresses the dual challenges of the ever increasing volume of professional literature and their diverse forms of knowledge presented in the literature, many of which are not amenable to direct implementation in practice. The goal of the course is to enable the student to meaningfully incorporate current research findings in their support for clients with acute and long-term health needs. 
 
NUR407 – Special Topics and Issues in Nursing (3 credits) 
This course focuses on contemporary issues that affect the nursing profession in the U.S. 
and internationally. Topics are selected by the faculty to ensure the international perspective is addressed with attention to global health issues and international differences in health care delivery and financing. 
 
NUR408 – Nursing Leadership and Management (3 credits) 
This course focuses on dynamic role of nurses as managers and leaders in health care settings. Topics include the characteristics of leaders in the clinical setting, including communication, effective decision-making, the use and abuse of power and politics, and handling stress. Topics cover general management including financial management, employee performance evaluations and coaching, corporate culture, and change. 
 
NUR410 – Community and Public Health Nursing (3 credits) 
This course focuses on the role of the nurse in community and public health nursing. 
Topics that are covered include assessment of community health, identification of health needs in the community and vulnerable populations, health promotion and risk reduction across the life span, community and public health services, and program planning and evaluation for optimal health. Students will examine the importance of health team relationships, and the range of client care in the community. 
 
	NUR499	Nursing Capstone (3 credits)
The nursing capstone course provides students with an experience of investigating and identifying needs/problems of aggregates in a selected community setting. Working from the knowledge and competencies gained in previous courses, and in collaboration with members of the healthcare community, students will design and develop an evidence- based community health project with an emphasis on quality improvement to meet the identified needs in a community. To fulfill the capstone requirements, students are required to present their personal portfolio, demonstrate mastery of the skills they have learned in liberal arts and sciences, as well as their academic achievement of the course learning outcomes in NUR401-NUR410 and the program learning outcomes. The personal portfolio provides evidence of the student’s professional growth and progression to a baccalaureate professional nurse. Prerequisite: Advanced standing. 
 
PED101 – Individual Sports (3 credits) 
This course includes an introduction to physical education materials and methods for elementary physical education teacher education. The course will review initial principles of teaching elementary physical education, introducing lesson plan writing, and discuss materials for elementary physical education teaching. The course is designed to acquire and share the knowledge relating to individual sport as well as demonstrating skill(s) required in each sport. Emphasis will be on the proper technique in weight training to strengthen and tone muscles and increase muscular endurance; rules, specific techniques and training used in sprinting, hurdles, long distance, and field events; and rules, skills, strategy, and etiquette of racquetball. 
 
PED102 – Team Sports (3 credits) 
This course is designed for the student to acquire and be able to teach and demonstrate the skills relating to each individual sport and demonstrate skills required in each sport. Emphasis will be on proper technique, the rules, care of equipment, skills, tactics and strategies and etiquette of each sport including but not limited to invasion sport, target sport, net/wall sport, fielding/striking sport and lifetime activities. In addition, this course will introduce specific methods to middle and secondary teaching, including lesson plan writing and motor skill teaching. 
 
PED116 – Foundations of Physical Education and Sport (3 credits) 
Exploration of the history and philosophy of physical education and sport within the context of humanity's cultural development. As an introductory physical education and sport course, this course will explore technology in health and physical education as part of current topics in 21ST century skills and assessment. 
 

PED209 – Adapted Physical Education and Fitness Assessment (3 credits) 
An Introduction to various disabilities and disabling conditions that are found among atypical students and their relationship to the planning and administration of adapted physical education programs. 

	PED250	Kinesiology and Biomechanics (3 credits) 
This course is designed to link the basics of skeletal structure, anatomy, the motor learning components of the central nervous system, and skeletal muscle function, to basic Newtonian mechanics and general force-velocity physics. Special emphasis is the application of this information to real-life situations. Prerequisite: BIO211 (Cross-listed as BIO260) 
 
PED377A – Materials and Methods of Physical Education (3 credits) | PED377B – 
Materials and Methods of Physical Education 2 (3 credits) 
This series of courses is designed to prepare students to teach physical education at the elementary (K-3), middle school (4-8) and the secondary school classroom and beyond (9- Adult). Topics discussed will be curriculum planning, organizing, methodology, instructional techniques, and evaluation. In addition, the selection and use of age and developmentally appropriate materials, games, and activities will be a topic of discussion and practice, including a significant fieldwork experience. Prerequisite: Completion of Level I. 
 
PED395 – Physiology of Exercise and Performance Assessment (3 credits) 
Studies the physiological changes accompanying acute and chronic exercise. Lecture and laboratory experiences are planned to enable the student to develop, administer, and evaluate physiological tests and prescribe training procedures. This is intended to emphasize application-specific content. Prerequisite: BIO211 (Cross-listed as BIO365) 
 
PED418 – Organization & Administration of Physical Education and Sport (3 credits) Explores various concepts, management principles and theories recognized as essential elements for management of programs. A study of procedures necessary to manage day- to-day administrative functions. Individualized research units required and effectively integrated into various subject disciplines. 
 
PED422 – Advanced Topics in Physical Education (3 credits) 
This course will emphasize topics of motor development and motor learning in physical education. Examples of topics include demonstrating the skills and strokes used for swimming, water safety, and aerobic, gymnastic and rhythm movement concepts necessary for physical activity demonstration in physical education. This course will further explore current curriculum models enhancing physical movement and academic improvement. 
 
PHY110 – General Physics (3 credits) | PHY111 – General Physics 2 (3 credits) 
This two-course sequence presents an algebra-based study of the basic laws of nature and how they describe the fundamental aspects of matter and energy and their interactions. Areas of study include the tools of physics, Newtonian mechanics, waves, sound, and heat and thermodynamics, electricity and magnetism, light, and selected elements of modern physics. 

	PHL Y1102	 General Physics Lab 1 (13 Ccredits)  and PHL 111 General Physics Lab 2
 (1 Credit)
This lab course provides exposure to the experimental methods of science through hands on exercises related to selected topics coverscovered in PHY110 and PHY 111. Prerequisite: PHY110 or concurrent. 
 


PSC100 – American Government and Politics (3 credits) 
Survey of American government and politics, including federal, state, and local governments, with consideration of the constitutions, civil liberties, partisan voting behavior, and functions of executive, legislative, and judicial branches of our government. 
 
PSY100 – Principles of Psychology (3 credits) 
This course consists of the study of the mind, behavior, biopsychology, psychological development, sensation, perception, learning, remembering, cognitive processing, emotion, motivation, stress, personality, intelligence, social psychology, psychopathology, and therapies for mental disorders. 
 
SCI105 – Life Science (3 credits) 
This course covers the fundamental concepts of biology, chemistry, and physics as they apply to living organisms. The course is explicitly designed to help prepare students for anatomy and physiology as well as laying a foundation for microbiology and pathophysiology. This course is expected to improve student performance on TEAS as well as improved overall student performance, persistence, and learning. 
 
SCI216 – Physical Science (3 credits) 
This survey course provides coverage of Newtonian mechanics, forms of energy, and the basics of chemistry. Topics include the laws of motion, momentum, electricity, magnetism, waves and sound, light and color, nuclear energy, atomic bonds, how chemicals mix and react, and organic compounds. 
 
SLF400 – Customer Relationship Management for Business (3 credits) 
This course is designed to introduce students to the use cases of customer relationship management systems, specifically Salesforce, and how end users on sales teams leverage Salesforce’s Sales Cloud Lightning tool. Students will learn how sales team members like 
Sales Development Representatives, Account Managers, Sales Managers, and Customer 
Service Managers use the tool, in the process building a foundational understanding of Sales Cloud and Service Cloud, Salesforce’s most widely used products. Students will learn how information like accounts, contacts, records, leads, and opportunities are stored in Salesforce. They will gain practical skills working with Sales and Service Cloud by updating information according to the sales process, creating basic reports and dashboards for forecasting projections, and understanding how standard user profiles and permissions work. 
 
SLF401 – Introduction to Salesforce Administration (3 credits) 
In this course, students will explore the Salesforce fundamentals covered in the Customer Relationship Management for Business course from the perspective of a CRM system administrator. They will learn how to conduct the typical job functions of a junior Salesforce administrator, who is responsible for setting up and maintaining an organization’s Salesforce instance. Students will explore Salesforce user management, platform customization, and user interface configuration, then get hands-on practice by translating and fulfilling simulated “feature requests” from business users, managers, and other stakeholders. Students will create a custom app to meet a business-specific use case, and learn how to customize Salesforce reporting tools to address analytical requests. 
 SLF402 – Advanced Topics in Salesforce Administration (3 credits) 
Building upon Salesforce fundamentals and basic administration/customization skills gained from the Customer Relationship Management for Business and Introduction to Salesforce Administration courses, this course will challenge students to utilize increasingly complex Salesforce functionality as a CRM system administrator. Students will learn to customize advanced Salesforce settings and implement a permission and sharing model to control access to data and records. They will learn how to enable and configure standard Sales and Service Cloud features to support business-specific use cases. They will deepen their understanding of how to translate business requirements into functional specifications and configure custom features using Process Automation tools. Students will learn how to use Salesforce tools to improve and maintain data quality. They will also explore and configure advanced analytics capabilities through historical trend reports, joined reports, and creating dynamic dashboards. 

SLF403 – Applied Business Solutions with Salesforce (3 credits) 
In this course, students will build on their knowledge of fundamental Salesforce administrator skills to analyze business processes and optimize workflows in an applied business context. Students will use data analysis tools both within and outside Salesforce in order to measure key metrics and identify areas for improvement. Additionally, students will practice job-relevant business communication skills and demonstrate effective stakeholder management. The skills taught in this course are designed to prepare students for roles such as Salesforce Business Analyst, Salesforce Administrator, and Sales Ops Analyst. 
SMG210 – Principles of Sports Management (3 credits) 
Overview of the structure of the sports industry. Introduction and analysis of career opportunities, facilities, marketing, client retention, budgeting, accounting, fund raising, gender issues, current issues, and organizational structure as related to various sport domains. 
 
SMG230 – Governance and Ethics in Sports (3 credits) 
An investigation of how personal ethics, professional ethics, and personal moral development is necessary for successful management of sport. Examines sports governance at the professional, collegiate, high school, and amateur levels with an understanding of how governmental agencies influence the role of sports governing bodies. Studies conditions of membership in a governing body, sanctions, and route of appeal. 
 
SMG340 – Facility and Event Management of Sports (3 credits) 
A comprehensive study of the multifaceted details involved in the management operations of sport facilities. Examines the functions of planning, organizing, leading and evaluating as well as the operation and financing of sport facilities. Visits to public and private arenas, coliseums and stadiums will be arranged. A hands-on practicum involving a sport event is to be conducted. 
 
 
SMG380 – Legal Aspects of Sports (3 credits) 
An introduction to the application of law to the sports industry. Topics include product liability, tort liability, anti-trust law, state, and federal legislation specific to sport, contract law, constitutional law, agency law, and collective bargaining as a component of labor law. These topics are explored as they relate to sport. 
 
SMG601 – Economics of Sports and Recreation (3 credits) 
This course offers an in depth survey of the economics of sports, recreation, and the associated industries. Supply and demand is related to the sports and recreation industries, focusing on applications such as: cost-benefit analysis, revenue generation, sport market structures, competition, partnerships, and alliances. In addition, students will explore labor-management topics, market data, public relations and marketing and sports regulations. 
SMG602 – Sports and Recreation Finance (3 credits) 
The student will learn about the finance as relates to sports and recreation within the context of such issues as developing new venues, money management, and sponsorship in sports. The concepts of revenue and expense, accounting principles and financial analysis will be discussed. In addition, budgeting, planning, creating a business plan and regulatory and government influence within sports will be emphasized. 
 
SMG604 – Sports and Recreation Planning, Promotion, and Evaluation (3 credits) The course examines the models that are most effective in terms of planning, promoting, and evaluating sport organizations. The course addresses sales and promotion methods within the sports industry. The student will distinguish differences in marketing and promotion as well as understanding the establishing of a robust management campaign. Training the staff as well as retaining and motivating them will be detailed. In addition, sponsorship platforms and customer service and retention will be detailed. 
SOC110 – Introduction to Sociology (3 credits) 
This course is designed to give a broad overview of the field of sociology. It focuses on all aspects of society: culture, social interaction, institutions, group processes, social control, diversity, and inequality based on race, ethnicity, class, gender, and all causes and the nature of social stability and social change. 
 
SOC130 – Criminology (3 credits) 
This course provides an overview of the field of criminology to include the history of its development. Topics include various classical theories of crime, milestones in criminological thought and current theories of crime causation. 
 
 
SPE120 – Areas of Exceptionality in Special Education (3 credits) 
This is a survey class designed to introduce the student to the characteristics of exceptional learners and their education. Classroom practices and the psychological, sociological, legal, and medical dimensions of disabilities and giftedness will be emphasized. 
 
 
ADMINISTRATION  
 
 
BOARD OF TRUSTEES 
Ms. Virginia B Clark, Chair, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 
Robert L. Caslen, Lieutenant General, U.S Army (retired), New Smyrna Beach, Florida 
Dr. Charles M Cook, Watertown, Massachusetts 
Mr. Javed Hamid, Washington, D.C.
Mr. Ranil Herath, Black Diamond, WA 
Dr. Humbert B Powell, III, New York, New York (Alumnus)
Mr. Mikhail Shneyder, Salt Lake City, UT
Mr. Jason Woody, Greenwich, Connecticut 

UNIVERSITY ADMINISTRATION 
Weber, Paul – President – CEO 
MPM, Keller Graduate School of Management, DeVry University; BA, English and Sociology, Marquette University  
Johnson, Shelley – Provost 
BSN, Bachelor of Science in Nursing – University of Pennsylvania; 
MSN, Community Health Nursing – Pennsylvania State University;  
EdD, Educational Leadership – University of Phoenix;  
Community Participatory Nursing Action Research Fellow – University of Pennsylvania; Executive Master of Business Administration, Kellogg – Northwestern University 
Bacon, Carolyn – Director of Alumni Relations 
BA, Human Resources, Salem College  

 Dailey, Amy – Director, IHI and Health Sciences
MS, Psychology, Tiffin University
Post-Baccaularette Certificate, University of Toledo
BA, Psychology, University of Toledo
Freedman, Phyllis D – Director of Library Services 
PhD, Library Science, The University of Pittsburgh; MLS, Florida State University; BA, English Education and Speech, University of Florida  
Gaines, Hope – Communications Strategist 
BA, Saint Cloud State University  
Greathouse, Jennifer – Director of ASN Nursing Education 
MSN, Master of Science in Nursing, South University
; BSN, Bachelor of Science in Nursing, Alderson Broaddus University
; Associate Degree in Respiratory Therapy, St. Luke’s School of Nursing 
Joseph, Alexander – Athletic Director – Compliance 
MBA, Sports and Recreation Management, Glenville State College; BS, Sports Management, Glenville State College 
Kuhns, Debbie – Director of Education 
EdD, Educational Leadership, Educational Technology, West Virginia University; MA, Educational Leadership, Behavioral Disorders, West Virginia University; BS, Speech and Hearing Therapy, West Virginia University  
Kuhns, Greg – Dean of Professional Studies - ADA Title II Student Representative 
EdD, Educational Leadership, West Virginia University; 
MA, Educational Leadership, West Virginia University; 
BA, Elementary Education, Health Education, Fairmont State College  
 
Laverty, Mike - Program Director, School of Business
            EdD Organizational Leadership, Nova Southeastern University;
            MBA/ Project management specialization, Keller Graduate School of Management
            Six Sigma Black belt/ Lean Black Belt- Villanova University
            BA   American studies, University of Notre Dame  
Lounsbury, Camm – Executive Director of Academic Operations 
PhD, Public Safety-Criminal Justice, Capella University
MS, Criminal Justice, Kaplan University; 
BS, Criminal Justice, American InterContinental University  
Marcero, Anya – Registrar 
MBA - Lourdes University (Expected 8/2024) 
BA, Multidisciplinary Studies, Siena Heights University 
AS, Monroe County Community College  
McMaster, Rian – Associate Registrar 
MBA, Marketing Concentration, Purdue University Global
BA, Psychology, Valparaiso University  

Nelson, Naquita – Dean of Nursing
		DNP, Doctorate of Nursing Practice – Nova Southeastern University
		MSN, Women’s Health Nurse Practitioner – Georgia State University
		MA, Management – Webster University
		BSN, Bachelor of Science in Nursing – Florida State University
		BS, Bachelor of Science in Psychology – Florida A&M University
Osso, Rosemary – Dean of Curriculum and Innovation
EdD, Higher Education Administration; Northeastern University - Expected Graduation 2025
	MS, Organizational Leadership, Advanced Certificate in Instructional Design & Delivery;  Manhattan  College
BS, Psychology, College of Mount Saint Vincent  
Roberts, Stephanie – Facilities Director and Business Manager 
MBA, International Business, Salem International University; BS, Environmental Science, Salem International University 
Shaver, Joseph – Director of Campus Safety and Security 
AA, Criminal Justice, Salem International University; Criminal Justice and Private 
Security, Pioneer Joint Vocational School; Security Forces Academy, US Air Force 
 Tyler, Tammy – Director of Housing and Residence Life 
Verble, Ginger – VP of Finance 
MBA, Accounting, Salem University; BS, Accounting, Salem-Teikyo University 
Young, Tim – Director of Upward Bound 
MA, Counseling, West Virginia University; BA, Social Work and Youth Services, West Virginia Wesleyan College 
 
EMERITUS ADMINISTRATORS 

Stam, James C (1978-1982) 
PhD, Stanford University; CAS, Northern Illinois University; MA, Biblical Literature, 
Wheaton College; AB, Philosophy, Wheaton College 


 
ACADEMIC CALENDAR  
The following pages detail the 4-week, 8-week and 16-week calendars.

ENROLLMENT START MONTHS BY PROGRAM
RN-BSN/MSN, DBA, HHP & IHI
January, March, May, July, September, November
ASN Program & National 2+1 BSN – Year 2 Cohorts
January, May, September
BIO, BUS, CJ, CS, EDU, IT & Pre-Health/Pre-ASN
January through December (monthly)
Enrichment Courses and Non-Degree Seeking Program of Enrollment
January, February, May, June, September, October  

